
                              New Cross, Hatcham, Surrey.
                              [Post-mark, January 10, 1845.]


    I love your verses with all my heart, dear Miss Barrett,—and this is
    no off-hand complimentary letter that I shall write,—whatever else,
    no prompt matter-of-course recognition of your genius, and there a
    graceful and natural end of the thing. Since the day last week when I
    first read your poems, I quite laugh to remember how I have been
    turning and turning again in my mind what I should be able to tell you
    of their effect upon me, for in the first flush of delight I thought I
    would this once get out of my habit of purely passive enjoyment, when
    I do really enjoy, and thoroughly justify my admiration—perhaps even,
    as a loyal fellow-craftsman should, try and find fault and do you some
    little good to be proud of hereafter!—but nothing comes of it all—so
    into me has it gone, and part of me has it become, this great living
    poetry of yours, not a flower of which but took root and grew—Oh, how
    different that is from lying to be dried and pressed flat, and prized
    highly, and put in a book with a proper account at top and bottom,
    and shut up and put away ... and the book called a 'Flora,' besides!
    After all, I need not give up the thought of doing that, too, in time;
    because even now, talking with whoever is worthy, I can give a reason
    for my faith in one and another excellence, the fresh strange music,
    the affluent language, the exquisite pathos and true new brave
    thought; but in this addressing myself to you—your own self, and for
    the first time, my feeling rises altogether. I do, as I say, love
    these books with all my heart—and I love you too. Do you know I was
    once not very far from seeing—really seeing you? Mr. Kenyon said to
    me one morning 'Would you like to see Miss Barrett?' then he went to
    announce me,—then he returned ... you were too unwell, and now it is
    years ago, and I feel as at some untoward passage in my travels, as if
    I had been close, so close, to some world's-wonder in chapel or crypt,
    only a screen to push and I might have entered, but there was some
    slight, so it now seems, slight and just sufficient bar to admission,
    and the half-opened door shut, and I went home my thousands of miles,
    and the sight was never to be?


    Well, these Poems were to be, and this true thankful joy and pride
    with which I feel myself,

 Yours ever faithfully,             
Robert Browning.

Miss Barrett,
    
50 Wimpole St.
R. Browning.


