
50 Wimpole Street: Jan. 11, 1845.


    I thank you, dear Mr. Browning, from the bottom of my heart. You meant
    to give me pleasure by your letter—and even if the object had not
    been answered, I ought still to thank you. But it is thoroughly
    answered. Such a letter from such a hand! Sympathy is dear—very dear
    to me: but the sympathy of a poet, and of such a poet, is the
    quintessence of sympathy to me! Will you take back my gratitude for
    it?—agreeing, too, that of all the commerce done in the world, from
    Tyre to Carthage, the exchange of sympathy for gratitude is the most
    princely thing!


    For the rest you draw me on with your kindness. It is difficult to get
    rid of people when you once have given them too much pleasure—that
    is a fact, and we will not stop for the moral of it. What I was going
    to say—after a little natural hesitation—is, that if ever you emerge
    without inconvenient effort from your 'passive state,' and will tell
    me of such faults as rise to the surface and strike you as important
    in my poems, (for of course, I do not think of troubling you with
    criticism in detail) you will confer a lasting obligation on me, and
    one which I shall value so much, that I covet it at a distance. I do
    not pretend to any extraordinary meekness under criticism and it is
    possible enough that I might not be altogether obedient to yours. But
    with my high respect for your power in your Art and for your
    experience as an artist, it would be quite impossible for me to hear a
    general observation of yours on what appear to you my master-faults,
    without being the better for it hereafter in some way. I ask for only
    a sentence or two of general observation—and I do not ask even for
    that, so as to tease you—but in the humble, low voice, which is so
    excellent a thing in women—particularly when they go a-begging! The
    most frequent general criticism I receive, is, I think, upon the
    style,—'if I would but change my style'! But that is an objection
    (isn't it?) to the writer bodily? Buffon says, and every sincere
    writer must feel, that 'Le style c'est l'homme'; a fact, however,
    scarcely calculated to lessen the objection with certain critics.


    Is it indeed true that I was so near to the pleasure and honour of
    making your acquaintance? and can it be true that you look back upon
    the lost opportunity with any regret? But—you know—if you had
    entered the 'crypt,' you might have caught cold, or been tired to
    death, and wished yourself 'a thousand miles off;' which would have
    been worse than travelling them. It is not my interest, however, to
    put such thoughts in your head about its being 'all for the best'; and
    I would rather hope (as I do) that what I lost by one chance I may
    recover by some future one. Winters shut me up as they do dormouse's
    eyes; in the spring, we shall see: and I am so much better that I
    seem turning round to the outward world again. And in the meantime I
    have learnt to know your voice, not merely from the poetry but from
    the kindness in it. Mr. Kenyon often speaks of you—dear Mr.
    Kenyon!—who most unspeakably, or only speakably with tears in my
    eyes,—has been my friend and helper, and my book's friend and helper!
    critic and sympathiser, true friend of all hours! You know him well
    enough, I think, to understand that I must be grateful to him.


    I am writing too much,—and notwithstanding that I am writing too
    much, I will write of one thing more. I will say that I am your
    debtor, not only for this cordial letter and for all the pleasure
    which came with it, but in other ways, and those the highest: and I
    will say that while I live to follow this divine art of poetry, in
    proportion to my love for it and my devotion to it, I must be a devout
    admirer and student of your works. This is in my heart to say to
    you—and I say it.


    And, for the rest, I am proud to remain

    Your obliged and faithful            



Elizabeth B. Barrett.

Robert Browning, Esq.
      
  New Cross, Hatcham, Surrey.


