
New Cross, Hatcham, Surrey.
Jan. 13, 1845.


    Dear Miss Barrett,—I just shall say, in as few words as I can, that
    you make me very happy, and that, now the beginning is over, I dare
    say I shall do better, because my poor praise, number one, was nearly
    as felicitously brought out, as a certain tribute to no less a
    personage than Tasso, which I was amused with at Rome some weeks ago,
    in a neat pencilling on the plaister-wall by his tomb at
    Sant'Onofrio—'Alla cara memoria—di—(please fancy solemn interspaces
    and grave capital letters at the new lines) di—Torquato Tasso—il
    Dottore Bernardini—offriva—il seguente Carme—O tu'—and no
    more,—the good man, it should seem, breaking down with the overload
    of love here! But my 'O tu'—was breathed out most sincerely, and now
    you have taken it in gracious part, the rest will come after.
    Only,—and which is why I write now—it looks as if I have introduced
    some phrase or other about 'your faults' so cleverly as to give
    exactly the opposite meaning to what I meant, which was, that in my
    first ardour I had thought to tell you of everything which impressed
    me in your verses, down, even, to whatever 'faults' I could find,—a
    good earnest, when I had got to them, that I had left out not much
    between—as if some Mr. Fellows were to say, in the overflow of his
    first enthusiasm of rewarded adventure: 'I will describe you all the
    outer life and ways of these Lycians, down to their very
    sandal-thongs,' whereto the be-corresponded one rejoins—'Shall I get
    next week, then, your dissertation on sandal-thongs'? Yes, and a
    little about the 'Olympian Horses,' and God-charioteers as well!


    What 'struck me as faults,' were not matters on the removal of which,
    one was to have—poetry, or high poetry,—but the very highest poetry,
    so I thought, and that, to universal recognition. For myself, or any
    artist, in many of the cases there would be a positive loss of time,
    peculiar artist's pleasure—for an instructed eye loves to see where
    the brush has dipped twice in a lustrous colour, has lain insistingly
    along a favourite outline, dwelt lovingly in a grand shadow; for these
    'too muches' for the everybody's picture are so many helps to the
    making out the real painter's picture as he had it in his brain. And
    all of the Titian's Naples Magdalen must have once been golden in its
    degree to justify that heap of hair in her hands—the only gold
    effected now!


    But about this soon—for night is drawing on and I go out, yet cannot,
    quiet at conscience, till I report (to myself, for I never said it
    to you, I think) that your poetry must be, cannot but be, infinitely
    more to me than mine to you—for you do what I always wanted, hoped
    to do, and only seem now likely to do for the first time. You speak
    out, you,—I only make men and women speak—give you truth broken
    into prismatic hues, and fear the pure white light, even if it is in
    me, but I am going to try; so it will be no small comfort to have your
    company just now, seeing that when you have your men and women
    aforesaid, you are busied with them, whereas it seems bleak,
    melancholy work, this talking to the wind (for I have begun)—yet I
    don't think I shall let you hear, after all, the savage things about
    Popes and imaginative religions that I must say.


    See how I go on and on to you, I who, whenever now and then pulled, by
    the head and hair, into letter-writing, get sorrowfully on for a line
    or two, as the cognate creature urged on by stick and string, and then
    come down 'flop' upon the sweet haven of page one, line last, as
    serene as the sleep of the virtuous! You will never more, I hope, talk
    of 'the honour of my acquaintance,' but I will joyfully wait for the
    delight of your friendship, and the spring, and my Chapel-sight after
    all!

    Ever yours most faithfully,

R. Browning.


    For Mr. Kenyon—I have a convenient theory about him, and his
    otherwise quite unaccountable kindness to me; but 'tis quite night
    now, and they call me.




