
50 Wimpole Street: Jan. 15, 1845.


    Dear Mr. Browning,—The fault was clearly with me and not with you.


    When I had an Italian master, years ago, he told me that there was an
    unpronounceable English word which absolutely expressed me, and which
    he would say in his own tongue, as he could not in mine—'testa
    lunga.' Of course, the signor meant headlong!—and now I have had
    enough to tame me, and might be expected to stand still in my stall.
    But you see I do not. Headlong I was at first, and headlong I
    continue—precipitously rushing forward through all manner of nettles
    and briars instead of keeping the path; guessing at the meaning of
    unknown words instead of looking into the dictionary—tearing open
    letters, and never untying a string,—and expecting everything to be
    done in a minute, and the thunder to be as quick as the lightning. And
    so, at your half word I flew at the whole one, with all its possible
    consequences, and wrote what you read. Our common friend, as I think
    he is, Mr. Horne, is often forced to entreat me into patience and
    coolness of purpose, though his only intercourse with me has been by
    letter. And, by the way, you will be sorry to hear that during his
    stay in Germany he has been 'headlong' (out of a metaphor) twice;
    once, in falling from the Drachenfels, when he only just saved himself
    by catching at a vine; and once quite lately, at Christmas, in a fall
    on the ice of the Elbe in skating, when he dislocated his left
    shoulder in a very painful manner. He is doing quite well, I believe,
    but it was sad to have such a shadow from the German Christmas tree,
    and he a stranger.


    In art, however, I understand that it does not do to be headlong, but
    patient and laborious—and there is a love strong enough, even in me, to
    overcome nature. I apprehend what you mean in the criticism you just
    intimate, and shall turn it over and over in my mind until I get practical
    good from it. What no mere critic sees, but what you, an artist, know, is
    the difference between the thing desired and the thing attained, between the
    idea in the writer's mind and the ειδωλον cast off in his work. All the effort—the quick'ning of the
    breath and beating of the heart in pursuit, which is ruffling and
    injurious to the general effect of a composition; all which you call
    'insistency,' and which many would call superfluity, and which is
    superfluous in a sense—you can pardon, because you understand. The
    great chasm between the thing I say, and the thing I would say, would
    be quite dispiriting to me, in spite even of such kindnesses as yours,
    if the desire did not master the despondency. 'Oh for a horse with
    wings!' It is wrong of me to write so of myself—only you put your
    finger on the root of a fault, which has, to my fancy, been a little
    misapprehended. I do not say everything I think (as has been said of
    me by master-critics) but I take every means to say what I think,
    which is different!—or I fancy so!


    In one thing, however, you are wrong. Why should you deny the full
    measure of my delight and benefit from your writings? I could tell you
    why you should not. You have in your vision two worlds, or to use the
    language of the schools of the day, you are both subjective and
    objective in the habits of your mind. You can deal both with abstract
    thought and with human passion in the most passionate sense. Thus, you
    have an immense grasp in Art; and no one at all accustomed to consider
    the usual forms of it, could help regarding with reverence and
    gladness the gradual expansion of your powers. Then you are
    'masculine' to the height—and I, as a woman, have studied some of
    your gestures of language and intonation wistfully, as a thing beyond
    me far! and the more admirable for being beyond.


    Of your new work I hear with delight. How good of you to tell me. And
    it is not dramatic in the strict sense, I am to understand—(am I
    right in understanding so?) and you speak, in your own person 'to the
    winds'? no—but to the thousand living sympathies which will awake to
    hear you. A great dramatic power may develop itself otherwise than in
    the formal drama; and I have been guilty of wishing, before this hour
    (for reasons which I will not thrust upon you after all my tedious
    writing), that you would give the public a poem unassociated directly
    or indirectly with the stage, for a trial on the popular heart. I
    reverence the drama, but—


    But I break in on myself out of consideration for you. I might have
    done it, you will think, before. I vex your 'serene sleep of the
    virtuous' like a nightmare. Do not say 'No.' I am sure I do! As to
    the vain parlance of the world, I did not talk of the 'honour of your
    acquaintance' without a true sense of honour, indeed; but I shall
    willingly exchange it all (and now, if you please, at this moment,
    for fear of worldly mutabilities) for the 'delight of your
    friendship.'

Believe me, therefore, dear Mr. Browning,


Faithfully yours, and gratefully,


Elizabeth B. Barrett.


    For Mr. Kenyon's kindness, as I see it, no theory will account. I
    class it with mesmerism for that reason.



