
New Cross, Hatcham, Monday Night.
   [Post-mark, January 28, 1845.]


    Dear Miss Barrett,—Your books lie on my table here, at arm's length
    from me, in this old room where I sit all day: and when my head aches
    or wanders or strikes work, as it now or then will, I take my chance
    for either green-covered volume, as if it were so much fresh trefoil
    to feel in one's hands this winter-time,—and round I turn, and,
    putting a decisive elbow on three or four half-done-with 'Bells' of
    mine, read, read, read, and just as I have shut up the book and walked
    to the window, I recollect that you wanted me to find faults there,
    and that, in an unwise hour, I engaged to do so. Meantime, the days
    go by (the whitethroat is come and sings now) and as I would not have
    you 'look down on me from your white heights' as promise breaker,
    evader, or forgetter, if I could help: and as, if I am very candid and
    contrite, you may find it in your heart to write to me again—who
    knows?—I shall say at once that the said faults cannot be lost, must
    be somewhere, and shall be faithfully brought you back whenever they
    turn up,—as people tell one of missing matters. I am rather exacting,
    myself, with my own gentle audience, and get to say spiteful things
    about them when they are backward in their dues of appreciation—but
    really, really—could I be quite sure that anybody as good as—I
    must go on, I suppose, and say—as myself, even, were honestly to feel
    towards me as I do, towards the writer of 'Bertha,' and the 'Drama,'
    and the 'Duchess,' and the 'Page' and—the whole two volumes, I should
    be paid after a fashion, I know.


    One thing I can do—pencil, if you like, and annotate, and dissertate
    upon that I love most and least—I think I can do it, that is.


    Here an odd memory comes—of a friend who,—volunteering such a
    service to a sonnet-writing somebody, gave him a taste of his quality
    in a side-column of short criticisms on sonnet the First, and starting
    off the beginning three lines with, of course, 'bad, worse,
    worst'—made by a generous mintage of words to meet the sudden run of
    his epithets, 'worser, worserer, worserest' pay off the second terzet
    in full—no 'badder, badderer, badderest' fell to the Second's
    allowance, and 'worser' &c. answered the demands of the Third;
    'worster, worsterer, worsterest' supplied the emergency of the Fourth;
    and, bestowing his last 'worserestest and worstestest' on lines 13 and
    14, my friend (slapping his forehead like an emptied strong-box)
    frankly declared himself bankrupt, and honourably incompetent, to
    satisfy the reasonable expectations of the rest of the series!


    What an illustration of the law by which opposite ideas suggest
    opposite, and contrary images come together!


    See now, how, of that 'Friendship' you offer me (and here Juliet's
    word rises to my lips)—I feel sure once and for ever. I have got
    already, I see, into this little pet-handwriting of mine (not anyone
    else's) which scratches on as if theatrical copyists (ah me!) and
    Bradbury and Evans' Reader were not! But you shall get something
    better than this nonsense one day, if you will have patience with
    me—hardly better, though, because this does me real good, gives real
    relief, to write. After all, you know nothing, next to nothing of me,
    and that stops me. Spring is to come, however!


    If you hate writing to me as I hate writing to nearly everybody, I
    pray you never write—if you do, as you say, care for anything I have
    done. I will simply assure you, that meaning to begin work in deep
    earnest, begin without affectation, God knows,—I do not know what
    will help me more than hearing from you,—and therefore, if you do not
    so very much hate it, I know I shall hear from you—and very little
    more about your 'tiring me.'

Ever yours faithfully,          


    Robert Browning.


