
50 Walpole Street: Feb. 3, 1845.
[Transcriber's Note: So in original. Should be "Wimpole Street."] 


    Why how could I hate to write to you, dear Mr. Browning? Could you
    believe in such a thing? If nobody likes writing to everybody (except
    such professional letter writers as you and I are not), yet
    everybody likes writing to somebody, and it would be strange and
    contradictory if I were not always delighted both to hear from you
    and to write to you, this talking upon paper being as good a social
    pleasure as another, when our means are somewhat straitened. As for
    me, I have done most of my talking by post of late years—as people
    shut up in dungeons take up with scrawling mottoes on the walls. Not
    that I write to many in the way of regular correspondence, as our
    friend Mr. Horne predicates of me in his romances (which is mere
    romancing!), but that there are a few who will write and be written to
    by me without a sense of injury. Dear Miss Mitford, for instance. You
    do not know her, I think, personally, although she was the first to
    tell me (when I was very ill and insensible to all the glories of the
    world except poetry), of the grand scene in 'Pippa Passes.' She has
    filled a large drawer in this room with delightful letters, heart-warm
    and soul-warm, ... driftings of nature (if sunshine could drift like
    snow), and which, if they should ever fall the way of all writing,
    into print, would assume the folio shape as a matter of course, and
    take rank on the lowest shelf of libraries, with Benedictine editions
    of the Fathers, κ.τ.λ. I write this to you to show how I can
    have pleasure in letters, and never think them too long, nor too
    frequent, nor too illegible from being written in little 'pet hands.'
    I can read any MS. except the writing on the pyramids. And if you will
    only promise to treat me en bon camarade, without reference to the
    conventionalities of 'ladies and gentlemen,' taking no thought for
    your sentences (nor for mine), nor for your blots (nor for mine), nor
    for your blunt speaking (nor for mine), nor for your badd speling (nor
    for mine), and if you agree to send me a blotted thought whenever you
    are in the mind for it, and with as little ceremony and less
    legibility than you would think it necessary to employ towards your
    printer—why, then, I am ready to sign and seal the contract, and to
    rejoice in being 'articled' as your correspondent. Only don't let us
    have any constraint, any ceremony! Don't be civil to me when you
    feel rude,—nor loquacious when you incline to silence,—nor yielding
    in the manners when you are perverse in the mind. See how out of the
    world I am! Suffer me to profit by it in almost the only profitable
    circumstance, and let us rest from the bowing and the courtesying,
    you and I, on each side. You will find me an honest man on the whole,
    if rather hasty and prejudging, which is a different thing from
    prejudice at the worst. And we have great sympathies in common, and I
    am inclined to look up to you in many things, and to learn as much of
    everything as you will teach me. On the other hand you must prepare
    yourself to forbear and to forgive—will you? While I throw off the
    ceremony, I hold the faster to the kindness.


    Is it true, as you say, that I 'know so "little"' of you? And is it
    true, as others say, that the productions of an artist do not partake
    of his real nature, ... that in the minor sense, man is not made in
    the image of God? It is not true, to my mind—and therefore it is
    not true that I know little of you, except in as far as it is true
    (which I believe) that your greatest works are to come. Need I assure
    you that I shall always hear with the deepest interest every word you
    will say to me of what you are doing or about to do? I hear of the
    'old room' and the '"Bells" lying about,' with an interest which you
    may guess at, perhaps. And when you tell me besides, of my poems
    being there, and of your caring for them so much beyond the tide-mark
    of my hopes, the pleasure rounds itself into a charm, and prevents its
    own expression. Overjoyed I am with this cordial sympathy—but it is
    better, I feel, to try to justify it by future work than to thank you
    for it now. I think—if I may dare to name myself with you in the
    poetic relation—that we both have high views of the Art we follow,
    and stedfast purpose in the pursuit of it, and that we should not,
    either of us, be likely to be thrown from the course, by the casting
    of any Atalanta-ball of speedy popularity. But I do not know, I cannot
    guess, whether you are liable to be pained deeply by hard criticism
    and cold neglect, such as original writers like yourself are too often
    exposed to—or whether the love of Art is enough for you, and the
    exercise of Art the filling joy of your life. Not that praise must not
    always, of necessity, be delightful to the artist, but that it may be
    redundant to his content. Do you think so? or not? It appears to me
    that poets who, like Keats, are highly susceptible to criticism, must
    be jealous, in their own persons, of the future honour of their works.
    Because, if a work is worthy, honour must follow it, though the worker
    should not live to see that following overtaking. Now, is it not
    enough that the work be honoured—enough I mean, for the worker? And
    is it not enough to keep down a poet's ordinary wearing anxieties, to
    think, that if his work be worthy it will have honour, and, if not,
    that 'Sparta must have nobler sons than he'? I am writing nothing
    applicable, I see, to anything in question, but when one falls into a
    favourite train of thought, one indulges oneself in thinking on. I
    began in thinking and wondering what sort of artistic constitution you
    had, being determined, as you may observe (with a sarcastic smile at
    the impertinence), to set about knowing as much as possible of you
    immediately. Then you spoke of your 'gentle audience' (you began),
    and I, who know that you have not one but many enthusiastic
    admirers—the 'fit and few' in the intense meaning—yet not the
    diffused fame which will come to you presently, wrote on, down the
    margin of the subject, till I parted from it altogether. But, after
    all, we are on the proper matter of sympathy. And after all, and after
    all that has been said and mused upon the 'natural ills,' the anxiety,
    and wearing out experienced by the true artist,—is not the good
    immeasurably greater than the evil? Is it not great good, and great
    joy? For my part, I wonder sometimes—I surprise myself wondering—how
    without such an object and purpose of life, people find it worth while
    to live at all. And, for happiness—why, my only idea of happiness, as
    far as my personal enjoyment is concerned, (but I have been
    straightened in some respects and in comparison with the majority of
    livers!) lies deep in poetry and its associations. And then, the
    escape from pangs of heart and bodily weakness—when you throw off
    yourself—what you feel to be yourself—into another atmosphere
    and into other relations where your life may spread its wings out new,
    and gather on every separate plume a brightness from the sun of the
    sun! Is it possible that imaginative writers should be so fond of
    depreciating and lamenting over their own destiny? Possible,
    certainly—but reasonable, not at all—and grateful, less than
    anything!


    My faults, my faults—Shall I help you? Ah—you see them too well, I
    fear. And do you know that I also have something of your feeling
    about 'being about to begin,' or I should dare to praise you for
    having it. But in you, it is different—it is, in you, a virtue. When
    Prometheus had recounted a long list of sorrows to be endured by Io, and
    declared at last that he was μηδεπω εν προοιμιοις,
    poor Io burst out crying. And when the author of 'Paracelsus' and the
    'Bells and Pomegranates' says that he is only 'going to begin' we may
    well (to take 'the opposite idea,' as you write) rejoice and clap our
    hands. Yet I believe that, whatever you may have done, you will do
    what is greater. It is my faith for you.


    And how I should like to know what poets have been your sponsors, 'to
    promise and vow' for you,—and whether you have held true to early
    tastes, or leapt violently from them, and what books you read, and
    what hours you write in. How curious I could prove myself!—(if it
    isn't proved already).


    But this is too much indeed, past all bearing, I suspect. Well, but if
    I ever write to you again—I mean, if you wish it—it may be in the
    other extreme of shortness. So do not take me for a born heroine of
    Richardson, or think that I sin always to this length, else,—you
    might indeed repent your quotation from Juliet—which I guessed at
    once—and of course—

    
      
        
          
            
              

    I have no joy in this contract to-day!
    It is too unadvised, too rash and sudden.



                                      
            
          
        
      
    

    Ever faithfully yours,                 



    Elizabeth B. Barrett. 


