
Hatcham, Tuesday.
 [Post-mark, February 11, 1845.]


    Dear Miss Barrett,—People would hardly ever tell falsehoods about a
    matter, if they had been let tell truth in the beginning, for it is
    hard to prophane one's very self, and nobody who has, for instance,
    used certain words and ways to a mother or a father could, even if
    by the devil's help he would, reproduce or mimic them with any
    effect to anybody else that was to be won over—and so, if 'I love
    you' were always outspoken when it might be, there would, I suppose,
    be no fear of its desecration at any after time. But lo! only last
    night, I had to write, on the part of Mr. Carlyle, to a certain
    ungainly, foolish gentleman who keeps back from him, with all the
    fussy impotence of stupidity (not bad feeling, alas! for that we
    could deal with) a certain MS. letter of Cromwell's which completes
    the collection now going to press; and this long-ears had to be 'dear
    Sir'd and obedient servanted' till I said (to use a mild word)
    'commend me to the sincerities of this kind of thing.'! When I spoke
    of you knowing little of me, one of the senses in which I meant so was
    this—that I would not well vowel-point my common-place letters and
    syllables with a masoretic other sound and sense, make my 'dear'
    something intenser than 'dears' in ordinary, and 'yours ever' a
    thought more significant than the run of its like. And all this came
    of your talking of 'tiring me,' 'being too envious,' &c. &c., which I
    should never have heard of had the plain truth looked out of my letter
    with its unmistakable eyes. Now, what you say of the 'bowing,' and
    convention that is to be, and tant de façons that are not to be,
    helps me once and for ever—for have I not a right to say simply that,
    for reasons I know, for other reasons I don't exactly know, but might
    if I chose to think a little, and for still other reasons, which, most
    likely, all the choosing and thinking in the world would not make me
    know, I had rather hear from you than see anybody else. Never you
    care, dear noble Carlyle, nor you, my own friend Alfred over the sea,
    nor a troop of true lovers!—Are not their fates written? there! Don't
    you answer this, please, but, mind it is on record, and now then, with
    a lighter conscience I shall begin replying to your questions. But
    then—what I have printed gives no knowledge of me—it evidences
    abilities of various kinds, if you will—and a dramatic sympathy with
    certain modifications of passion ... that I think—But I never have
    begun, even, what I hope I was born to begin and end—'R.B. a
    poem'—and next, if I speak (and, God knows, feel), as if what you
    have read were sadly imperfect demonstrations of even mere ability, it
    is from no absurd vanity, though it might seem so—these scenes and
    song-scraps are such mere and very escapes of my inner power, which
    lives in me like the light in those crazy Mediterranean phares I have
    watched at sea, wherein the light is ever revolving in a dark gallery,
    bright and alive, and only after a weary interval leaps out, for a
    moment, from the one narrow chink, and then goes on with the blind
    wall between it and you; and, no doubt, then, precisely, does the
    poor drudge that carries the cresset set himself most busily to trim
    the wick—for don't think I want to say I have not worked hard—(this
    head of mine knows better)—but the work has been inside, and not
    when at stated times I held up my light to you—and, that there is no
    self-delusion here, I would prove to you (and nobody else), even by
    opening this desk I write on, and showing what stuff, in the way of
    wood, I could make a great bonfire with, if I might only knock the
    whole clumsy top off my tower! Of course, every writing body says the
    same, so I gain nothing by the avowal; but when I remember how I have
    done what was published, and half done what may never be, I say with
    some right, you can know but little of me. Still, I hope sometimes,
    though phrenologists will have it that I cannot, and am doing
    better with this darling 'Luria'—so safe in my head, and a tiny slip
    of paper I cover with my thumb!


    Then you inquire about my 'sensitiveness to criticism,' and I shall be
    glad to tell you exactly, because I have, more than once, taken a
    course you might else not understand. I shall live always—that is for
    me—I am living here this 1845, that is for London. I write from a
    thorough conviction that it is the duty of me, and with the belief
    that, after every drawback and shortcoming, I do my best, all things
    considered—that is for me, and, so being, the not being listened to
    by one human creature would, I hope, in nowise affect me. But of
    course I must, if for merely scientific purposes, know all about this
    1845, its ways and doings, and something I do know, as that for a
    dozen cabbages, if I pleased to grow them in the garden here, I might
    demand, say, a dozen pence at Covent Garden Market,—and that for a
    dozen scenes, of the average goodness, I may challenge as many
    plaudits at the theatre close by; and a dozen pages of verse, brought
    to the Rialto where verse-merchants most do congregate, ought to bring
    me a fair proportion of the Reviewers' gold currency, seeing the other
    traders pouch their winnings, as I do see. Well, when they won't pay
    me for my cabbages, nor praise me for my poems, I may, if I please,
    say 'more's the shame,' and bid both parties 'decamp to the crows,' in
    Greek phrase, and yet go very lighthearted back to a garden-full of
    rose-trees, and a soul-full of comforts. If they had bought my greens
    I should have been able to buy the last number of Punch, and go
    through the toll-gate of Waterloo Bridge, and give the blind
    clarionet-player a trifle, and all without changing my gold. If they
    had taken to my books, my father and mother would have been proud of
    this and the other 'favourable critique,' and—at least so folks
    hold—I should have to pay Mr. Moxon less by a few pounds,
    whereas—but you see! Indeed I force myself to say ever and anon, in
    the interest of the market-gardeners regular, and Keatses proper,
    'It's nothing to you, critics, hucksters, all of you, if I have
    this garden and this conscience—I might go die at Rome, or take to
    gin and the newspaper, for what you would care!' So I don't quite
    lay open my resources to everybody. But it does so happen, that I have
    met with much more than I could have expected in this matter of kindly
    and prompt recognition. I never wanted a real set of good hearty
    praisers—and no bad reviewers—I am quite content with my share.
    No—what I laughed at in my 'gentle audience' is a sad trick the real
    admirers have of admiring at the wrong place—enough to make an
    apostle swear. That does make me savage—never the other kind of
    people; why, think now—take your own 'Drama of Exile' and let me
    send it to the first twenty men and women that shall knock at your
    door to-day and after—of whom the first five are the Postman, the
    seller of cheap sealing-wax, Mr. Hawkins Junr, the Butcher for orders,
    and the Tax-gatherer—will you let me, by Cornelius Agrippa's
    assistance, force these five and these fellows to read, and report on,
    this 'Drama'—and, when I have put these faithful reports into fair
    English, do you believe they would be better than, if as good, as, the
    general run of Periodical criticisms? Not they, I will venture to
    affirm. But then—once again, I get these people together and give
    them your book, and persuade them, moreover, that by praising it, the
    Postman will be helping its author to divide Long Acre into two beats,
    one of which she will take with half the salary and all the red
    collar,—that a sealing-wax vendor will see red wafers brought into
    vogue, and so on with the rest—and won't you just wish for your
    Spectators and Observers and Newcastle-upon-Tyne—Hebdomadal
    Mercuries back again! You see the inference—I do sincerely esteem
    it a perfectly providential and miraculous thing that they are so
    well-behaved in ordinary, these critics; and for Keats and Tennyson to
    'go softly all their days' for a gruff word or two is quite
    inexplicable to me, and always has been. Tennyson reads the
    Quarterly and does as they bid him, with the most solemn face in the
    world—out goes this, in goes that, all is changed and ranged. Oh me!


    Out comes the sun, in comes the Times and eleven strikes (it does)
    already, and I have to go to Town, and I have no alternative but that
    this story of the Critic and Poet, 'the Bear and the Fiddle,' should
    'begin but break off in the middle'; yet I doubt—nor will you
    henceforth, I know, say, 'I vex you, I am sure, by this lengthy
    writing.' Mind that spring is coming, for all this snow; and know me
    for yours ever faithfully,

R. Browning.


    I don't dare—yet I will—ask can you read this? Because I could
    write a little better, but not so fast. Do you keep writing just as
    you do now!


