
50 Wimpole Street, February 17, 1845.


    Dear Mr. Browning,—To begin with the end (which is only
    characteristic of the perverse like myself), I assure you I read your
    handwriting as currently as I could read the clearest type from font.
    If I had practised the art of reading your letters all my life, I
    couldn't do it better. And then I approve of small MS. upon principle.
    Think of what an immense quantity of physical energy must go to the
    making of those immense sweeping handwritings achieved by some persons
    ... Mr. Landor, for instance, who writes as if he had the sky for a
    copybook and dotted his i's in proportion. People who do such things
    should wear gauntlets; yes, and have none to wear; or they wouldn't
    waste their time so. People who write—by profession—shall I
    say?—never should do it, or what will become of them when most of
    their strength retires into their head and heart, (as is the case with
    some of us and may be the case with all) and when they have to write a
    poem twelve times over, as Mr. Kenyon says I should do if I were
    virtuous? Not that I do it. Does anybody do it, I wonder? Do you,
    ever? From what you tell me of the trimming of the light, I imagine
    not. And besides, one may be laborious as a writer, without copying
    twelve times over. I believe there are people who will tell you in a
    moment what three times six is, without 'doing it' on their fingers;
    and in the same way one may work one's verses in one's head quite as
    laboriously as on paper—I maintain it. I consider myself a very
    patient, laborious writer—though dear Mr. Kenyon laughs me to scorn
    when I say so. And just see how it could be otherwise. If I were
    netting a purse I might be thinking of something else and drop my
    stitches; or even if I were writing verses to please a popular taste,
    I might be careless in it. But the pursuit of an Ideal acknowledged by
    the mind, will draw and concentrate the powers of the mind—and Art,
    you know, is a jealous god and demands the whole man—or woman. I
    cannot conceive of a sincere artist who is also a careless one—though
    one may have a quicker hand than another, in general,—and though all
    are liable to vicissitudes in the degree of facility—and to
    entanglements in the machinery, notwithstanding every degree of
    facility. You may write twenty lines one day—or even three like
    Euripides in three days—and a hundred lines in one more day—and yet
    on the hundred, may have been expended as much good work, as on the
    twenty and the three. And also, as you say, the lamp is trimmed behind
    the wall—and the act of utterance is the evidence of foregone study
    still more than it is the occasion to study. The deep interest with
    which I read all that you had the kindness to write to me of yourself,
    you must trust me for, as I find it hard to express it. It is sympathy
    in one way, and interest every way! And now, see! Although you proved
    to me with admirable logic that, for reasons which you know and
    reasons which you don't know, I couldn't possibly know anything about
    you; though that is all true—and proven (which is better than
    true)—I really did understand of you before I was told, exactly what
    you told me. Yes, I did indeed. I felt sure that as a poet you fronted
    the future—and that your chief works, in your own apprehension, were
    to come. Oh—I take no credit of sagacity for it; as I did not long
    ago to my sisters and brothers, when I professed to have knowledge of
    all their friends whom I never saw in my life, by the image coming
    with the name; and threw them into shouts of laughter by giving out
    all the blue eyes and black eyes and hazel eyes and noses Roman and
    Gothic ticketed aright for the Mr. Smiths and Miss Hawkinses,—and hit
    the bull's eye and the true features of the case, ten times out of
    twelve! But you are different. You are to be made out by the
    comparative anatomy system. You have thrown out fragments of os ...
    sublime ... indicative of soul-mammothism—and you live to develop
    your nature,—if you live. That is easy and plain. You have taken a
    great range—from those high faint notes of the mystics which are
    beyond personality ... to dramatic impersonations, gruff with nature,
    'gr-r-r- you swine'; and when these are thrown into harmony, as in a
    manner they are in 'Pippa Passes' (which I could find in my heart to
    covet the authorship of, more than any of your works—), the
    combinations of effect must always be striking and noble—and you must
    feel yourself drawn on to such combinations more and more. But I do
    not, you say, know yourself—you. I only know abilities and faculties.
    Well, then, teach me yourself—you. I will not insist on the
    knowledge—and, in fact, you have not written the R.B. poem yet—your
    rays fall obliquely rather than directly straight. I see you only in
    your moon. Do tell me all of yourself that you can and will ... before
    the R.B. poem comes out. And what is 'Luria'? A poem and not a drama?
    I mean, a poem not in the dramatic form? Well! I have wondered at you
    sometimes, not for daring, but for bearing to trust your noble works
    into the great mill of the 'rank, popular' playhouse, to be ground to
    pieces between the teeth of vulgar actors and actresses. I, for one,
    would as soon have 'my soul among lions.' 'There is a fascination in
    it,' says Miss Mitford, and I am sure there must be, to account for
    it. Publics in the mass are bad enough; but to distil the dregs of the
    public and baptise oneself in that acrid moisture, where can be the
    temptation? I could swear by Shakespeare, as was once sworn 'by those
    dead at Marathon,' that I do not see where. I love the drama too. I
    look to our old dramatists as to our Kings and princes in poetry. I
    love them through all the deeps of their abominations. But the theatre
    in those days was a better medium between the people and the poet; and
    the press in those days was a less sufficient medium than now. Still,
    the poet suffered by the theatre even then; and the reasons are very
    obvious.


    How true—how true ... is all you say about critics. My convictions
    follow you in every word. And I delighted to read your views of the
    poet's right aspect towards criticism—I read them with the most
    complete appreciation and sympathy. I have sometimes thought that it
    would be a curious and instructive process, as illustrative of the
    wisdom and apprehensiveness of critics, if anyone would collect the
    critical soliloquies of every age touching its own literature, (as far
    as such may be extant) and confer them with the literary product of
    the said ages. Professor Wilson has begun something of the kind
    apparently, in his initiatory paper of the last Blackwood number on
    critics, beginning with Dryden—but he seems to have no design in his
    notice—it is a mere critique on the critic. And then, he should have
    begun earlier than Dryden—earlier even than Sir Philip Sydney, who in
    the noble 'Discourse on Poetry,' gives such singular evidence of being
    stone-critic-blind to the gods who moved around him. As far as I can
    remember, he saw even Shakespeare but indifferently. Oh, it was in his
    eyes quite an unillumed age, that period of Elizabeth which we see
    full of suns! and few can see what is close to the eyes though they
    run their heads against it; the denial of contemporary genius is the
    rule rather than the exception. No one counts the eagles in the nest,
    till there is a rush of wings; and lo! they are flown. And here we
    speak of understanding men, such as the Sydneys and the Drydens. Of
    the great body of critics you observe rightly, that they are better
    than might be expected of their badness, only the fact of their
    influence is no less undeniable than the reason why they should not
    be influential. The brazen kettles will be taken for oracles all the
    world over. But the influence is for to-day, for this hour—not for
    to-morrow and the day after—unless indeed, as you say, the poet do
    himself perpetuate the influence by submitting to it. Do you know
    Tennyson?—that is, with a face to face knowledge? I have great
    admiration for him. In execution, he is exquisite,—and, in music, a
    most subtle weigher out to the ear of fine airs. That such a poet
    should submit blindly to the suggestions of his critics, (I do not say
    that suggestions from without may not be accepted with discrimination
    sometimes, to the benefit of the acceptor), blindly and implicitly to
    the suggestions of his critics, is much as if Babbage were to take my
    opinion and undo his calculating machine by it. Napoleon called poetry
    science creuse—which, although he was not scientific in poetry
    himself, is true enough. But anybody is qualified, according to
    everybody, for giving opinions upon poetry. It is not so in chymistry
    and mathematics. Nor is it so, I believe, in whist and the polka. But
    then these are more serious things.


    Yes—and it does delight me to hear of your garden full of roses and
    soul full of comforts! You have the right to both—you have the key to
    both. You have written enough to live by, though only beginning to
    write, as you say of yourself. And this reminds me to remind you that
    when I talked of coveting most the authorship of your 'Pippa,' I did
    not mean to call it your finest work (you might reproach me for
    that), but just to express a personal feeling. Do you know what it
    is to covet your neighbour's poetry?—not his fame, but his poetry?—I
    dare say not. You are too generous. And, in fact, beauty is beauty,
    and, whether it comes by our own hand or another's, blessed be the
    coming of it! I, besides, feel that. And yet—and yet, I have been
    aware of a feeling within me which has spoken two or three times to
    the effect of a wish, that I had been visited with the vision of
    'Pippa,' before you—and confiteor tibi—I confess the baseness of
    it. The conception is, to my mind, most exquisite and altogether
    original—and the contrast in the working out of the plan, singularly
    expressive of various faculty.


    Is the poem under your thumb, emerging from it? and in what metre? May
    I ask such questions?


    And does Mr. Carlyle tell you that he has forbidden all 'singing' to
    this perverse and froward generation, which should work and not sing?
    And have you told Mr. Carlyle that song is work, and also the
    condition of work? I am a devout sitter at his feet—and it is an
    effort to me to think him wrong in anything—and once when he told me
    to write prose and not verse, I fancied that his opinion was I had
    mistaken my calling,—a fancy which in infinite kindness and
    gentleness he stooped immediately to correct. I never shall forget the
    grace of that kindness—but then! For him to have thought ill of
    me, would not have been strange—I often think ill of myself, as God
    knows. But for Carlyle to think of putting away, even for a season,
    the poetry of the world, was wonderful, and has left me ruffled in my
    thoughts ever since. I do not know him personally at all. But as his
    disciple I ventured (by an exceptional motive) to send him my poems,
    and I heard from him as a consequence. 'Dear and noble' he is
    indeed—and a poet unaware of himself; all but the sense of music. You
    feel it so—do you not? And the 'dear sir' has let him have the
    'letter of Cromwell,' I hope; and satisfied 'the obedient servant.'
    The curious thing in this world is not the stupidity, but the
    upper-handism of the stupidity. The geese are in the Capitol, and the
    Romans in the farmyard—and it seems all quite natural that it should
    be so, both to geese and Romans!


    But there are things you say, which seem to me supernatural, for
    reasons which I know and for reasons which I don't know. You will let
    me be grateful to you,—will you not? You must, if you will or not.
    And also—I would not wait for more leave—if I could but see your
    desk—as I do your death's heads and the spider-webs appertaining; but
    the soul of Cornelius Agrippa fades from me.

Ever faithfully yours,                 


Elizabeth B. Barrett.

