
Wednesday Morning—Spring!
[Post-mark, February 26, 1845.]


    Real warm Spring, dear Miss Barrett, and the birds know it; and in
    Spring I shall see you, surely see you—for when did I once fail to
    get whatever I had set my heart upon? As I ask myself sometimes, with
    a strange fear.


    I took up this paper to write a great deal—now, I don't think I shall
    write much—'I shall see you,' I say!


    That 'Luria' you enquire about, shall be my last play—for it is but a
    play, woe's me! I have one done here, 'A Soul's Tragedy,' as it is
    properly enough called, but that would not do to end with (end I
    will), and Luria is a Moor, of Othello's country, and devotes himself
    to something he thinks Florence, and the old fortune follows—all in
    my brain yet, but the bright weather helps and I will soon loosen my
    Braccio and Puccio (a pale discontented man), and Tiburzio (the Pisan,
    good true fellow, this one), and Domizia the Lady—loosen all these on
    dear foolish (ravishing must his folly be), golden-hearted Luria, all
    these with their worldly-wisdom and Tuscan shrewd ways; and, for me,
    the misfortune is, I sympathise just as much with these as with
    him,—so there can no good come of keeping this wild company any
    longer, and 'Luria' and the other sadder ruin of one Chiappino—these
    got rid of, I will do as you bid me, and—say first I have some
    Romances and Lyrics, all dramatic, to dispatch, and then, I shall
    stoop of a sudden under and out of this dancing ring of men and women
    hand in hand, and stand still awhile, should my eyes dazzle, and when
    that's over, they will be gone and you will be there, pas vrai? For,
    as I think I told you, I always shiver involuntarily when I look—no,
    glance—at this First Poem of mine to be. 'Now,' I call it, what,
    upon my soul,—for a solemn matter it is,—what is to be done now,
    believed now, so far as it has been revealed to me—solemn words,
    truly—and to find myself writing them to any one else! Enough now.


    I know Tennyson 'face to face,'—no more than that. I know Carlyle and
    love him—know him so well, that I would have told you he had shaken
    that grand head of his at 'singing,' so thoroughly does he love and
    live by it. When I last saw him, a fortnight ago, he turned, from I
    don't know what other talk, quite abruptly on me with, 'Did you never
    try to write a Song? Of all things in the world, that I should be
    proudest to do.' Then came his definition of a song—then, with an
    appealing look to Mrs. C., 'I always say that some day in spite of
    nature and my stars, I shall burst into a song' (he is not
    mechanically 'musical,' he meant, and the music is the poetry, he
    holds, and should enwrap the thought as Donne says 'an amber-drop
    enwraps a bee'), and then he began to recite an old Scotch song,
    stopping at the first rude couplet, 'The beginning words are merely to
    set the tune, they tell me'—and then again at the couplet about—or,
    to the effect that—'give me' (but in broad Scotch) 'give me but my
    lass, I care not for my cogie.' 'He says,' quoth Carlyle
    magisterially, 'that if you allow him the love of his lass, you may
    take away all else, even his cogie, his cup or can, and he cares not,'
    just as a professor expounds Lycophron. And just before I left
    England, six months ago, did not I hear him croon, if not certainly
    sing, 'Charlie is my darling' ('my darling' with an adoring
    emphasis), and then he stood back, as it were, from the song, to look
    at it better, and said 'How must that notion of ideal wondrous
    perfection have impressed itself in this old Jacobite's "young
    Cavalier"—("They go to save their land, and the young
    Cavalier!!")—when I who care nothing about such a rag of a man,
    cannot but feel as he felt, in speaking his words after him!' After
    saying which, he would be sure to counsel everybody to get their heads
    clear of all singing! Don't let me forget to clap hands, we got the
    letter, dearly bought as it was by the 'Dear Sirs,' &c., and
    insignificant scrap as it proved, but still it is got, to my
    encouragement in diplomacy.


    Who told you of my sculls and spider webs—Horne? Last year I petted
    extraordinarily a fine fellow, (a garden spider—there was the
    singularity,—the thin clever-even-for-a-spider-sort, and they are
    so 'spirited and sly,' all of them—this kind makes a long cone of
    web, with a square chamber of vantage at the end, and there he sits
    loosely and looks about), a great fellow that housed himself, with
    real gusto, in the jaws of a great scull, whence he watched me as I
    wrote, and I remember speaking to Horne about his good points.
    Phrenologists look gravely at that great scull, by the way, and hope,
    in their grim manner, that its owner made a good end. He looks
    quietly, now, out at the green little hill behind. I have no little
    insight to the feelings of furniture, and treat books and prints with
    a reasonable consideration. How some people use their pictures, for
    instance, is a mystery to me; very revolting all the same—portraits
    obliged to face each other for ever,—prints put together in
    portfolios. My Polidoro's perfect Andromeda along with 'Boors
    Carousing,' by Ostade,—where I found her,—my own father's doing, or
    I would say more.


    And when I have said I like 'Pippa' better than anything else I have
    done yet, I shall have answered all you bade me. And now may I
    begin questioning? No,—for it is all a pure delight to me, so that
    you do but write. I never was without good, kind, generous friends and
    lovers, so they say—so they were and are,—perhaps they came at the
    wrong time—I never wanted them—though that makes no difference in my
    gratitude I trust,—but I know myself—surely—and always have done
    so, for is there not somewhere the little book I first printed when a
    boy, with John Mill, the metaphysical head, his marginal note that
    'the writer possesses a deeper self-consciousness than I ever knew in
    a sane human being.' So I never deceived myself much, nor called my
    feelings for people other than they were. And who has a right to say,
    if I have not, that I had, but I said that, supernatural or no. Pray
    tell me, too, of your present doings and projects, and never write
    yourself 'grateful' to me, who am grateful, very grateful to
    you,—for none of your words but I take in earnest—and tell me if
    Spring be not coming, come, and I will take to writing the gravest
    of letters, because this beginning is for gladness' sake, like
    Carlyle's song couplet. My head aches a little to-day too, and, as
    poor dear Kirke White said to the moon, from his heap of mathematical
    papers,

'I throw aside the learned sheet;
I cannot choose but gaze, she looks so—mildly sweet.'


    Out on the foolish phrase, but there's hard rhyming without it.

Ever yours faithfully,          

Robert Browning.


