
Saturday Night, March 1 [1845].


    Dear Miss Barrett,—I seem to find of a sudden—surely I knew
    before—anyhow, I do find now, that with the octaves on octaves of
    quite new golden strings you enlarged the compass of my life's harp
    with, there is added, too, such a tragic chord, that which you
    touched, so gently, in the beginning of your letter I got this
    morning, 'just escaping' &c. But if my truest heart's wishes avail, as
    they have hitherto done, you shall laugh at East winds yet, as I do!
    See now, this sad feeling is so strange to me, that I must write it
    out, must, and you might give me great, the greatest pleasure for
    years and yet find me as passive as a stone used to wine libations,
    and as ready in expressing my sense of them, but when I am pained, I
    find the old theory of the uselessness of communicating the
    circumstances of it, singularly untenable. I have been 'spoiled' in
    this world—to such an extent, indeed, that I often reason out—make
    clear to myself—that I might very properly, so far as myself am
    concerned, take any step that would peril the whole of my future
    happiness—because the past is gained, secure, and on record; and,
    though not another of the old days should dawn on me, I shall not have
    lost my life, no! Out of all which you are—please—to make a sort of
    sense, if you can, so as to express that I have been deeply struck to
    find a new real unmistakable sorrow along with these as real but not
    so new joys you have given me. How strangely this connects itself in
    my mind with another subject in your note! I looked at that
    translation for a minute, not longer, years ago, knowing nothing about
    it or you, and I only looked to see what rendering a passage had
    received that was often in my thoughts.3 I forget your version (it
    was not yours, my 'yours' then; I mean I had no extraordinary
    interest about it), but the original makes Prometheus (telling over
    his bestowments towards human happiness) say, as something περαιτερω τωνδε,
    that he stopped mortals μη προδερκεσθαι μορον—το ποιον ευρων, asks the Chorus,
    τησδε φαρμακον νοσου?
    Whereto he replies, 
    τυφλας εν αυτοις ελπιδας κατωκισα
    (what you hear men dissertate upon by the hour, as proving
    the immortality of the soul apart from revelation, undying yearnings,
    restless longings, instinctive desires which, unless to be eventually
    indulged, it were cruel to plant in us, &c. &c.). But,
    μεγ' ωφελημα τουτ' εδωρησω βροτοις! concludes the chorus, like a sigh
    from the admitted Eleusinian Æschylus was! You cannot think how this
    foolish circumstance struck me this evening, so I thought I would e'en
    tell you at once and be done with it. Are you not my dear friend
    already, and shall I not use you? And pray you not to 'lean out of the
    window' when my own foot is only on the stair; do wait a little for

Yours ever,


R.B.


