
Tuesday Morning.
 [Post-mark, March 12, 1845.]


    Your letter made me so happy, dear Miss Barrett, that I have kept
    quiet this while; is it too great a shame if I begin to want more
    good news of you, and to say so? Because there has been a bitter wind
    ever since. Will you grant me a great favour? Always when you write,
    though about your own works, not Greek plays merely, put me in,
    always, a little official bulletin-line that shall say 'I am better'
    or 'still better,' will you? That is done, then—and now, what do I
    wish to tell you first? The poem you propose to make, for the times;
    the fearless fresh living work you describe, is the only Poem to be
    undertaken now by you or anyone that is a Poet at all; the only
    reality, only effective piece of service to be rendered God and man;
    it is what I have been all my life intending to do, and now shall be
    much, much nearer doing, since you will along with me. And you can
    do it, I know and am sure—so sure, that I could find in my heart to
    be jealous of your stopping in the way even to translate the
    Prometheus; though the accompanying monologue will make amends too. Or
    shall I set you a task I meant for myself once upon a time?—which,
    oh, how you would fulfil! Restore the Prometheus πυρφορος as
    Shelley did the Λυομενος; when I say 'restore,' I know, or
    very much fear, that the πυρφορος was the same with the
    πυρκαευς which, by a fragment, we sorrowfully ascertain to
    have been a Satyric Drama; but surely the capabilities of the subject
    are much greater than in this, we now wonder at; nay, they include all
    those of this last—for just see how magnificently the story unrolls
    itself. The beginning of Jupiter's dynasty, the calm in Heaven after
    the storm, the ascending—(stop, I will get the book and give the
    words), οπως ταχιστα τον πατρωον εις θρονον καθεζετ', ευθυς δαιμοσιν νεμει γερα αλλοισιν αλλα—κ.τ.λ., all the while
    Prometheus being the first among the first in honour, as
    καιτοι θεοισι τοις νεοις τουτοις γερα τις αλλος, η 'γω, παντελως διωρισε?
    then the one black hand-cloudlet storming the joyous
    blue and gold everywhere, βροτων δε των ταλαιπωρων λογον ουκ εσχεν ουδενα, and the design of Zeus to blot out the whole race,
    and plant a new one. And Prometheus with his grand solitary
    εγω δ' ετολμησα, and his saving them, as the first good, from
    annihilation. Then comes the darkening brow of Zeus, and estrangement
    from the benign circle of grateful gods, and the dissuasion of old
    confederates, and all the Right that one may fancy in Might, the
    strongest reasons παυεσθαι τροπου φιλανθρωπου coming
    from the own mind of the Titan, if you will, and all the while he
    shall be proceeding steadily in the alleviation of the sufferings of
    mortals whom, νηπιους οντας το πριν, εννους και φρενων επηβολους εθηκε, while still, in proportion, shall the doom he is
    about to draw on himself, manifest itself more and more distinctly,
    till at the last, he shall achieve the salvation of man, body (by the
    gift of fire) and soul (by even those τυφλαι ελπιδες,
    hopes of immortality), and so having rendered him utterly, according
    to the mythos here, independent of Jove—for observe, Prometheus in
    the play never talks of helping mortals more, of fearing for them
    more, of even benefiting them more by his sufferings. The rest is
    between Jove and himself; he will reveal the master-secret to Jove
    when he shall have released him, &c. There is no stipulation that the
    gifts to mortals shall be continued; indeed, by the fact that it is
    Prometheus who hangs on Caucasus while 'the ephemerals possess fire,'
    one sees that somehow mysteriously they are past Jove's harming now.
    Well, this wholly achieved, the price is as wholly accepted, and off
    into the darkness passes in calm triumphant grandeur the Titan, with
    Strength and Violence, and Vulcan's silent and downcast eyes, and then
    the gold clouds and renewed flushings of felicity shut up the scene
    again, with Might in his old throne again, yet with a new element of
    mistrust, and conscious shame, and fear, that writes significantly
    enough above all the glory and rejoicing that all is not as it was,
    nor will ever be. Such might be the framework of your Drama, just what
    cannot help striking one at first glance, and would not such a Drama
    go well before your translation? Do think of this and tell me—it
    nearly writes itself. You see, I meant the μεγ' ωφελημα
    to be a deep great truth; if there were no life beyond this, I think
    the hope in one would be an incalculable blessing for this life,
    which is melancholy for one like Æschylus to feel, if he could only
    hope, because the argument as to the ulterior good of those hopes is
    cut clean away, and what had he left?


    I do not find it take away from my feeling of the magnanimity of
    Prometheus that he should, in truth, complain (as he does from
    beginning to end) of what he finds himself suffering. He could have
    prevented all, and can stop it now—of that he never thinks for a
    moment. That was the old Greek way—they never let an antagonistic
    passion neutralise the other which was to influence the man to his
    praise or blame. A Greek hero fears exceedingly and battles it out,
    cries out when he is wounded and fights on, does not say his love or
    hate makes him see no danger or feel no pain. Æschylus from first word
    to last (ιδεσθε με, οια πασχω
    to 
    εσορας με, ως

εκδικα πασχω) insists on the unmitigated reality of the
    punishment which only the sun, and divine ether, and the godhead of
    his mother can comprehend; still, still that is only what I suppose
    Æschylus to have done—in your poem you shall make Prometheus our way.


    And now enough of Greek, which I am fast forgetting (for I never look
    at books I loved once)—it was your mention of the translation that
    brought out the old fast fading outlines of the Poem in my brain—the
    Greek poem, that is. You think—for I must get to you—that I
    'unconsciously exaggerate what you are to me.' Now, you don't know
    what that is, nor can I very well tell you, because the language
    with which I talk to myself of these matters is spiritual Attic, and
    'loves contractions,' as grammarians say; but I read it myself, and
    well know what it means, that's why I told you I was self-conscious—I
    meant that I never yet mistook my own feelings, one for
    another—there! Of what use is talking? Only do you stay here with me
    in the 'House' these few short years. Do you think I shall see you in
    two months, three months? I may travel, perhaps. So you have got to
    like society, and would enjoy it, you think? For me, I always hated
    it—have put up with it these six or seven years past, lest by
    foregoing it I should let some unknown good escape me, in the true
    time of it, and only discover my fault when too late; and now that I
    have done most of what is to be done, any lodge in a garden of
    cucumbers for me! I don't even care about reading now—the world, and
    pictures of it, rather than writings about the world! But you must
    read books in order to get words and forms for 'the public' if you
    write, and that you needs must do, if you fear God. I have no
    pleasure in writing myself—none, in the mere act—though all pleasure
    in the sense of fulfilling a duty, whence, if I have done my real
    best, judge how heart-breaking a matter must it be to be pronounced a
    poor creature by critic this and acquaintance the other! But I think
    you like the operation of writing as I should like that of painting or
    making music, do you not? After all, there is a great delight in the
    heart of the thing; and use and forethought have made me ready at all
    times to set to work—but—I don't know why—my heart sinks whenever I
    open this desk, and rises when I shut it. Yet but for what I have
    written you would never have heard of me—and through what you have
    written, not properly for it, I love and wish you well! Now, will
    you remember what I began my letter by saying—how you have promised
    to let me know if my wishing takes effect, and if you still continue
    better? And not even ... (since we are learned in magnanimity) don't
    even tell me that or anything else, if it teases you,—but wait your
    own good time, and know me for ... if these words were but my own, and
    fresh-minted for this moment's use!...

Yours ever faithfully,    


R. Browning.



