
50 Wimpole Street: March 20, 1845.


    Whenever I delay to write to you, dear Mr. Browning, it is not, be
    sure, that I take my 'own good time,' but submit to my own bad time.
    It was kind of you to wish to know how I was, and not unkind of me to
    suspend my answer to your question—for indeed I have not been very
    well, nor have had much heart for saying so. This implacable weather!
    this east wind that seems to blow through the sun and moon! who can be
    well in such a wind? Yet for me, I should not grumble. There has been
    nothing very bad the matter with me, as there used to be—I only grow
    weaker than usual, and learn my lesson of being mortal, in a
    corner—and then all this must end! April is coming. There will be
    both a May and a June if we live to see such things, and perhaps,
    after all, we may. And as to seeing you besides, I observe that you
    distrust me, and that perhaps you penetrate my morbidity and guess how
    when the moment comes to see a living human face to which I am not
    accustomed, I shrink and grow pale in the spirit. Do you? You are
    learned in human nature, and you know the consequences of leading such
    a secluded life as mine—notwithstanding all my fine philosophy about
    social duties and the like—well—if you have such knowledge or if you
    have it not, I cannot say, but I do say that I will indeed see you
    when the warm weather has revived me a little, and put the earth 'to
    rights' again so as to make pleasures of the sort possible. For if you
    think that I shall not like to see you, you are wrong, for all your
    learning. But I shall be afraid of you at first—though I am not, in
    writing thus. You are Paracelsus, and I am a recluse, with nerves that
    have been all broken on the rack, and now hang loosely—quivering at a
    step and breath.


    And what you say of society draws me on to many comparative thoughts
    of your life and mine. You seem to have drunken of the cup of life
    full, with the sun shining on it. I have lived only inwardly; or with
    sorrow, for a strong emotion. Before this seclusion of my illness, I
    was secluded still, and there are few of the youngest women in the
    world who have not seen more, heard more, known more, of society, than
    I, who am scarcely to be called young now. I grew up in the
    country—had no social opportunities, had my heart in books and
    poetry, and my experience in reveries. My sympathies drooped towards
    the ground like an untrained honeysuckle—and but for one, in my own
    house—but of this I cannot speak. It was a lonely life, growing green
    like the grass around it. Books and dreams were what I lived in—and
    domestic life only seemed to buzz gently around, like the bees about
    the grass. And so time passed, and passed—and afterwards, when my
    illness came and I seemed to stand at the edge of the world with all
    done, and no prospect (as appeared at one time) of ever passing the
    threshold of one room again; why then, I turned to thinking with some
    bitterness (after the greatest sorrow of my life had given me room and
    time to breathe) that I had stood blind in this temple I was about to
    leave—that I had seen no Human nature, that my brothers and sisters
    of the earth were names to me, that I had beheld no great mountain
    or river, nothing in fact. I was as a man dying who had not read
    Shakespeare, and it was too late! do you understand? And do you also
    know what a disadvantage this ignorance is to my art? Why, if I live
    on and yet do not escape from this seclusion, do you not perceive that
    I labour under signal disadvantages—that I am, in a manner, as a
    blind poet? Certainly, there is a compensation to a degree. I have
    had much of the inner life, and from the habit of self-consciousness
    and self-analysis, I make great guesses at Human nature in the main.
    But how willingly I would as a poet exchange some of this lumbering,
    ponderous, helpless knowledge of books, for some experience of life
    and man, for some....


    But all grumbling is a vile thing. We should all thank God for our
    measures of life, and think them enough for each of us. I write so,
    that you may not mistake what I wrote before in relation to society,
    although you do not see from my point of view; and that you may
    understand what I mean fully when I say, that I have lived all my
    chief joys, and indeed nearly all emotions that go warmly by that
    name and relate to myself personally, in poetry and in poetry alone.
    Like to write? Of course, of course I do. I seem to live while I
    write—it is life, for me. Why, what is to live? Not to eat and drink
    and breathe,—but to feel the life in you down all the fibres of
    being, passionately and joyfully. And thus, one lives in composition
    surely—not always—but when the wheel goes round and the procession
    is uninterrupted. Is it not so with you? oh—it must be so. For the
    rest, there will be necessarily a reaction; and, in my own particular
    case, whenever I see a poem of mine in print, or even smoothly
    transcribed, the reaction is most painful. The pleasure, the sense of
    power, without which I could not write a line, is gone in a moment;
    and nothing remains but disappointment and humiliation. I never wrote
    a poem which you could not persuade me to tear to pieces if you took
    me at the right moment! I have a seasonable humility, I do assure
    you.


    How delightful to talk about oneself; but as you 'tempted me and I did
    eat,' I entreat your longsuffering of my sin, and ah! if you would
    but sin back so in turn! You and I seem to meet in a mild contrarious
    harmony ... as in the 'si no, si no' of an Italian duet. I want to see
    more of men, and you have seen too much, you say. I am in ignorance,
    and you, in satiety. 'You don't even care about reading now.' Is it
    possible? And I am as 'fresh' about reading, as ever I was—as long as
    I keep out of the shadow of the dictionaries and of theological
    controversies, and the like. Shall I whisper it to you under the
    memory of the last rose of last summer? I am very fond of romances;
    yes! and I read them not only as some wise people are known to do, for
    the sake of the eloquence here and the sentiment there, and the
    graphic intermixtures here and there, but for the story! just as
    little children would, sitting on their papa's knee. My childish love
    of a story never wore out with my love of plum cake, and now there is
    not a hole in it. I make it a rule, for the most part, to read all the
    romances that other people are kind enough to write—and woe to the
    miserable wight who tells me how the third volume endeth. Have you in
    you any surviving innocence of this sort? or do you call it idiocy? If
    you do, I will forgive you, only smiling to myself—I give you
    notice,—with a smile of superior pleasure! Mr. Chorley made me quite
    laugh the other day by recommending Mary Hewitt's 'Improvisatore,'
    with a sort of deprecating reference to the descriptions in the
    book, just as if I never read a novel—I! I wrote a confession back
    to him which made him shake his head perhaps, and now I confess to
    you, unprovoked. I am one who could have forgotten the plague,
    listening to Boccaccio's stories; and I am not ashamed of it. I do not
    even 'see the better part,' I am so silly.


    Ah! you tempt me with a grand vision of Prometheus! I, who have just
    escaped with my life, after treading Milton's ground, you would send
    me to Æschylus's. No, I do not dare. And besides ... I am inclined
    to think that we want new forms, as well as thoughts. The old gods
    are dethroned. Why should we go back to the antique moulds, classical
    moulds, as they are so improperly called? If it is a necessity of Art
    to do so, why then those critics are right who hold that Art is
    exhausted and the world too worn out for poetry. I do not, for my
    part, believe this: and I believe the so-called necessity of Art to be
    the mere feebleness of the artist. Let us all aspire rather to Life,
    and let the dead bury their dead. If we have but courage to face these
    conventions, to touch this low ground, we shall take strength from it
    instead of losing it; and of that, I am intimately persuaded. For
    there is poetry everywhere; the 'treasure' (see the old fable) lies
    all over the field. And then Christianity is a worthy myth, and
    poetically acceptable.


    I had much to say to you, or at least something, of the 'blind hopes'
    &c., but am ashamed to take a step into a new sheet. If you mean 'to
    travel,' why, I shall have to miss you. Do you really mean it? How is
    the play going on? and the poem?


    May God bless you!

Ever and truly yours,

E.B.B.

