
Monday Morning.
[Post-mark, March 31, 1845.]


    When you read Don Quixote, my dear romance-reader, do you ever notice
    that flower of an incident of good fellowship where the friendly
    Squire of Him of the Moon, or the Looking glasses, (I forget which)
    passes to Sancho's dry lips, (all under a cork-tree one morning)—a
    plump wine-skin,—and do you admire dear brave Miguel's knowledge of
    thirsty nature when he tells you that the Drinker, having seriously
    considered for a space the Pleiads, or place where they should be,
    fell, as he slowly returned the shrivelled bottle to its donor, into a
    deep musing of an hour's length, or thereabouts, and then ... mark ...
    only then, fetching a profound sigh, broke silence with ... such a
    piece of praise as turns pale the labours in that way of Rabelais and
    the Teian (if he wasn't a Byzantine monk, alas!) and our Mr. Kenyon's
    stately self—(since my own especial poet à moi, that can do all
    with anybody, only 'sips like a fly,' she says, and so cares not to
    compete with these behemoths that drink up Jordan)—Well, then ...
    (oh, I must get quick to the sentence's end, and be brief as an
    oracle-explainer!)—the giver is you and the taker is I, and the
    letter is the wine, and the star-gazing is the reading the same, and
    the brown study is—how shall I deserve and be grateful enough to this
    new strange friend of my own, that has taken away my reproach among
    men, that have each and all their friend, so they say (... not that I
    believe all they say—they boast too soon sometimes, no doubt,—I once
    was shown a letter wherein the truth stumbled out after this fashion
    'Dere Smith,—I calls you "dere" ... because you are so in your
    shop!')—and the great sigh is,—there is no deserving nor being
    grateful at all,—and the breaking silence is, and the praise is ...
    ah, there, enough of it! This sunny morning is as if I wished it for
    you—10 strikes by the clock now—tell me if at 10 this morning you
    feel any good from my heart's wishes for you—I would give you all you
    want out of my own life and gladness and yet keep twice the stock that
    should by right have sufficed the thin white face that is laughing at
    me in the glass yonder at the fancy of its making anyone afraid ...
    and now, with another kind of laugh, at the thought that when its
    owner 'travels' next, he will leave off Miss Barrett along with port
    wine—Dii meliora piis, and, among them to

Yours every where, and at all times yours

R. Browning.


    I have all to say yet—next letter. R.B.


