
Tuesday Night.
[Post-mark, April 16, 1845.]


    I heard of you, dear Miss Barrett, between a Polka and a Cellarius the
    other evening, of Mr. Kenyon—how this wind must hurt you! And
    yesterday I had occasion to go your way—past, that is, Wimpole
    Street, the end of it,—and, do you know, I did not seem to have leave
    from you to go down it yet, much less count number after number till I
    came to yours,—much least than less, look up when I did come there.
    So I went on to a viperine she-friend of mine who, I think, rather
    loves me she does so hate me, and we talked over the chances of
    certain other friends who were to be balloted for at the 'Athenæum'
    last night,—one of whom, it seems, was in a fright about it—'to such
    little purpose' said my friend—'for he is so inoffensive—now, if one
    were to style you that—' 'Or you'—I said—and so we hugged
    ourselves in our grimness like tiger-cats. Then there is a deal in the
    papers to-day about Maynooth, and a meeting presided over by Lord
    Mayor Gibbs, and the Reverend Mr. Somebody's speech. And Mrs. Norton
    has gone and book-made at a great rate about the Prince of Wales,
    pleasantly putting off till his time all that used of old to be put
    off till his mother's time;—altogether, I should dearly like to hear
    from you, but not till the wind goes, and sun comes—because I shall
    see Mr. Kenyon next week and get him to tell me some more. By the way,
    do you suppose anybody else looks like him? If you do, the first room
    full of real London people you go among you will fancy to be lighted
    up by a saucer of burning salt and spirits of wine in the back ground.


    Monday—last night when I could do nothing else I began to write to
    you, such writing as you have seen—strange! The proper time and
    season for good sound sensible and profitable forms of speech—when
    ought it to have occurred, and how did I evade it in these letters of
    mine? For people begin with a graceful skittish levity, lest you
    should be struck all of a heap with what is to come, and that is
    sure to be the stuff and staple of the man, full of wisdom and
    sorrow,—and then again comes the fringe of reeds and pink little
    stones on the other side, that you may put foot on land, and draw
    breath, and think what a deep pond you have swum across. But you are
    the real deep wonder of a creature,—and I sail these paper-boats on
    you rather impudently. But I always mean to be very grave one
    day,—when I am in better spirits and can go fuori di me.


    And one thing I want to persuade you of, which is, that all you gain
    by travel is the discovery that you have gained nothing, and have done
    rightly in trusting to your innate ideas—or not rightly in
    distrusting them, as the case may be. You get, too, a little ...
    perhaps a considerable, good, in finding the world's accepted moulds
    everywhere, into which you may run and fix your own fused metal,—but
    not a grain Troy-weight do you get of new gold, silver or brass. After
    this, you go boldly on your own resources, and are justified to
    yourself, that's all. Three scratches with a pen,14 even with this
    pen,—and you have the green little Syrenusa where I have sate and
    heard the quails sing. One of these days I shall describe a country I
    have seen in my soul only, fruits, flowers, birds and all.

Ever yours, dear Miss Barrett,


R. Browning.


