
Thursday Morning.
[Post-mark, April 18, 1845.]


    If you did but know dear Mr. Browning how often I have written ... not
    this letter I am about to write, but another better letter to you, ...
    in the midst of my silence, ... you would not think for a moment that
    the east wind, with all the harm it does to me, is able to do the
    great harm of putting out the light of the thought of you to my mind;
    for this, indeed, it has no power to do. I had the pen in my hand once
    to write; and why it fell out, I cannot tell you. And you see, ... all
    your writing will not change the wind! You wished all manner of good
    to me one day as the clock struck ten; yes, and I assure you I was
    better that day—and I must not forget to tell you so though it is so
    long since. And therefore, I was logically bound to believe that you
    had never thought of me since ... unless you thought east winds of me!
    That was quite clear; was it not? or would have been; if it had not
    been for the supernatural conviction, I had above all, of your
    kindness, which was too large to be taken in the hinge of a syllogism.
    In fact I have long left off thinking that logic proves anything—it
    doesn't, you know.


    But your Lamia has taught you some subtle 'viperine' reasoning and
    motiving, for the turning down one street instead of another. It was
    conclusive.


    Ah—but you will never persuade me that I am the better, or as well,
    for the thing that I have not. We look from different points of view,
    and yours is the point of attainment. Not that you do not truly say
    that, when all is done, we must come home to place our engines, and
    act by our own strength. I do not want material as material; no one
    does—but every life requires a full experience, a various
    experience—and I have a profound conviction that where a poet has
    been shut from most of the outward aspects of life, he is at a
    lamentable disadvantage. Can you, speaking for yourself, separate the
    results in you from the external influences at work around you, that
    you say so boldly that you get nothing from the world? You do not
    directly, I know—but you do indirectly and by a rebound. Whatever
    acts upon you, becomes you—and whatever you love or hate, whatever
    charms you or is scorned by you, acts on you and becomes you. Have
    you read the 'Improvisatore'? or will you? The writer seems to feel,
    just as I do, the good of the outward life; and he is a poet in his
    soul. It is a book full of beauty and had a great charm to me.


    As to the Polkas and Cellariuses I do not covet them of course ... but
    what a strange world you seem to have, to me at a distance—what a
    strange husk of a world! How it looks to me like mandarin-life or
    something as remote; nay, not mandarin-life but mandarin manners,
    ... life, even the outer life, meaning something deeper, in my account
    of it. As to dear Mr. Kenyon I do not make the mistake of fancying
    that many can look like him or talk like him or be like him. I know
    enough to know otherwise. When he spoke of me he should have said that
    I was better notwithstanding the east wind. It is really true—I am
    getting slowly up from the prostration of the severe cold, and feel
    stronger in myself.


    But Mrs. Norton discourses excellent music—and for the rest, there
    are fruits in the world so over-ripe, that they will fall, ... without
    being gathered. Let Maynooth witness to it! if you think it worth
    while!

Ever yours,                              

Elizabeth B. Barrett.


    And is it nothing to be 'justified to one's self in one's
    resources?' 'That's all,' indeed! For the 'soul's country' we will
    have it also—and I know how well the birds sing in it. How glad I was
    by the way to see your letter!


