
Thursday.
[Post-mark, May 2, 1845.]


    People say of you and of me, dear Mr. Browning, that we love the
    darkness and use a sphinxine idiom in our talk; and really you do talk
    a little like a sphinx in your argument drawn from 'Vivian Grey.' Once
    I sate up all night to read 'Vivian Grey'; but I never drew such an
    argument from him. Not that I give it up (nor you up) for a mere
    mystery. Nor that I can 'see what you have got in you,' from a mere
    guess. But just observe! If I ask questions about novels, is it not
    because I want to know how much elbow-room there may be for our
    sympathies ... and whether there is room for my loose sleeves, and the
    lace lappets, as well as for my elbows; and because I want to see
    you by the refracted lights as well as by the direct ones; and
    because I am willing for you to know me from the beginning, with all
    my weaknesses and foolishnesses, ... as they are accounted by people
    who say to me 'no one would ever think, without knowing you, that you
    were so and so.' Now if I send all my idle questions to Colburn's
    Magazine, with other Gothic literature, and take to standing up in a
    perpendicular personality like the angel on the schoolman's needle, in
    my letters to come, without further leaning to the left or the
    right—why the end would be that you would take to 'running after
    the butterflies,' for change of air and exercise. And then ... oh ...
    then, my 'small neatly written manuscripts' might fall back into my
    desk...! (Not a 'full stop'!.)


    Indeed ... I do assure you ... I never for a moment thought of 'making
    conversation' about the 'Improvisatore' or novels in general, when I
    wrote what I did to you. I might, to other persons ... perhaps.
    Certainly not to you. I was not dealing round from one pack of cards
    to you and to others. That's what you meant to reproach me for you
    know,—and of that, I am not guilty at all. I never could think of
    'making conversation' in a letter to you—never. Women are said to
    partake of the nature of children—and my brothers call me 'absurdly
    childish' sometimes: and I am capable of being childishly 'in earnest'
    about novels, and straws, and such 'puppydogs' tails' as my Flush's!
    Also I write more letters than you do, ... I write in fact almost as
    you pay visits, ... and one has to 'make conversation' in turn, of
    course. But—give me something to vow by—whatever you meant in the
    'Vivian Grey' argument, you were wrong in it! and you never can be
    much more wrong—which is a comfortable reflection.


    Yet you leap very high at Dante's crown—or you do not leap, ... you
    simply extend your hand to it, and make a rustling among the laurel
    leaves, which is somewhat prophane. Dante's poetry only materials for
    the northern rhymers! I must think of that ... if you please ...
    before I agree with you. Dante's poetry seems to come down in hail,
    rather than in rain—but count me the drops congealed in one
    hailstone! Oh! the 'Flight of the Duchess'—do let us hear more of
    her! Are you (I wonder) ... not a 'self-flatterer,' ... but ... a
    flatterer.

Ever yours,  

E.B.B.


