
Friday Night.
[Post-mark, May 17, 1845.]


    My friend is not 'mistrustful' of me, no, because she don't fear I
    shall make mainprize of the stray cloaks and umbrellas down-stairs, or
    turn an article for Colburn's on her sayings and doings
    up-stairs,—but spite of that, she does mistrust ... so mistrust my
    common sense,—nay, uncommon and dramatic-poet's sense, if I am put on
    asserting it!—all which pieces of mistrust I could detect, and catch
    struggling, and pin to death in a moment, and put a label in, with
    name, genus and species, just like a horrible entomologist; only I
    won't, because the first visit of the Northwind will carry the whole
    tribe into the Red Sea—and those horns and tails and scalewings are
    best forgotten altogether. And now will I say a cutting thing and have
    done. Have I trusted my friend so,—or said even to myself, much
    less to her, she is even as—'Mr. Simpson' who desireth the honour of
    the acquaintance of Mr. B. whose admirable works have long been his,
    Simpson's, especial solace in private—and who accordingly is led to
    that personage by a mutual friend—Simpson blushing as only adorable
    ingenuousness can, and twisting the brim of his hat like a sailor
    giving evidence. Whereupon Mr. B. beginneth by remarking that the
    rooms are growing hot—or that he supposes Mr. S. has not heard if
    there will be another adjournment of the House to-night—whereupon Mr.
    S. looketh up all at once, brusheth the brim smooth again with his
    sleeve, and takes to his assurance once more, in something of a huff,
    and after staying his five minutes out for decency's sake, noddeth
    familiarly an adieu, and spinning round on his heel ejaculateth
    mentally—'Well, I did expect to see something different from that
    little yellow commonplace man ... and, now I come to think, there
    was some precious trash in that book of his'—Have I said 'so will
    Miss Barrett ejaculate?'


    Dear Miss Barrett, I thank you for the leave you give me, and for the
    infinite kindness of the way of giving it. I will call at 2 on
    Tuesday—not sooner, that you may have time to write should any
    adverse circumstances happen ... not that they need inconvenience you,
    because ... what I want particularly to tell you for now and
    hereafter—do not mind my coming in the least, but—should you be
    unwell, for instance,—just send or leave word, and I will come again,
    and again, and again—my time is of no importance, and I have
    acquaintances thick in the vicinity.


    Now if I do not seem grateful enough to you, am I so much to blame?
    You see it is high time you saw me, for I have clearly written
    myself out!

Ever yours,
R.B.


