
Saturday.
[Post-mark, May 17, 1845.]


    I shall be ready on Tuesday I hope, but I hate and protest against
    your horrible 'entomology.' Beginning to explain, would thrust me
    lower and lower down the circles of some sort of an 'Inferno'; only
    with my dying breath I would maintain that I never could, consciously
    or unconsciously, mean to distrust you; or, the least in the world, to
    Simpsonize you. What I said, ... it was you that put it into my head
    to say it—for certainly, in my usual disinclination to receive
    visitors, such a feeling does not enter. There, now! There, I am a
    whole 'giro' lower! Now, you will say perhaps that I distrust you,
    and nobody else! So it is best to be silent, and bear all the 'cutting
    things' with resignation! that is certain.


    Still I must really say, under this dreadful incubus-charge of
    Simpsonism, ... that you, who know everything, or at least make awful
    guesses at everything in one's feelings and motives, and profess to be
    able to pin them down in a book of classified inscriptions, ... should
    have been able to understand better, or misunderstand less, in a
    matter like this—Yes! I think so. I think you should have made out
    the case in some such way as it was in nature—viz. that you had
    lashed yourself up to an exorbitant wishing to see me, ... (you who
    could see, any day, people who are a hundredfold and to all social
    purposes, my superiors!) because I was unfortunate enough to be shut
    up in a room and silly enough to make a fuss about opening the door;
    and that I grew suddenly abashed by the consciousness of this. How
    different from a distrust of you! how different!


    Ah—if, after this day, you ever see any interpretable sign of
    distrustfulness in me, you may be 'cutting' again, and I will not cry
    out. In the meantime here is a fact for your 'entomology.' I have not
    so much distrust, as will make a doubt, as will make a curiosity
    for next Tuesday. Not the simplest modification of curiosity enters
    into the state of feeling with which I wait for Tuesday:—and if you
    are angry to hear me say so, ... why, you are more unjust than ever.


    (Let it be three instead of two—if the hour be as convenient to
    yourself.)


    Before you come, try to forgive me for my 'infinite kindness' in the
    manner of consenting to see you. Is it 'the cruellest cut of all' when
    you talk of infinite kindness, yet attribute such villainy to me?
    Well! but we are friends till Tuesday—and after perhaps.

Ever yours,
E.B.B.


    If on Tuesday you should be not well, pray do not come—Now, that is
    my request to your kindness.16


