
Saturday Morning.
[Post-mark, May 24, 1845.]


    Don't you remember I told you, once on a time that you 'knew nothing
    of me'? whereat you demurred—but I meant what I said, and knew it was
    so. To be grand in a simile, for every poor speck of a Vesuvius or a
    Stromboli in my microcosm there are huge layers of ice and pits of
    black cold water—and I make the most of my two or three fire-eyes,
    because I know by experience, alas, how these tend to extinction—and
    the ice grows and grows—still this last is true part of me, most
    characteristic part, best part perhaps, and I disown
    nothing—only,—when you talked of 'knowing me'! Still, I am utterly
    unused, of these late years particularly, to dream of communicating
    anything about that to another person (all my writings are purely
    dramatic as I am always anxious to say) that when I make never so
    little an attempt, no wonder if I bungle notably—'language,' too is
    an organ that never studded this heavy heavy head of mine. Will you
    not think me very brutal if I tell you I could almost smile at your
    misapprehension of what I meant to write?—Yet I will tell you,
    because it will undo the bad effect of my thoughtlessness, and at the
    same time exemplify the point I have all along been honestly earnest
    to set you right upon ... my real inferiority to you; just that and no
    more. I wrote to you, in an unwise moment, on the spur of being again
    'thanked,' and, unwisely writing just as if thinking to myself, said
    what must have looked absurd enough as seen apart from the horrible
    counterbalancing never-to-be-written rest of me—by the side of
    which, could it be written and put before you, my note would sink to
    its proper and relative place, and become a mere 'thank you' for your
    good opinion—which I assure you is far too generous—for I really
    believe you to be my superior in many respects, and feel uncomfortable
    till you see that, too—since I hope for your sympathy and
    assistance, and 'frankness is everything in such a case.' I do assure
    you, that had you read my note, only having 'known' so much of me
    as is implied in having inspected, for instance, the contents, merely,
    of that fatal and often-referred-to 'portfolio' there (Dii meliora
    piis!), you would see in it, (the note not the portfolio) the
    blandest utterance ever mild gentleman gave birth to. But I forgot
    that one may make too much noise in a silent place by playing the few
    notes on the 'ear-piercing fife' which in Othello's regimental band
    might have been thumped into decent subordination by his
    'spirit-stirring drum'—to say nothing of gong and ophicleide. Will
    you forgive me, on promise to remember for the future, and be more
    considerate? Not that you must too much despise me, neither; nor, of
    all things, apprehend I am attitudinizing à la Byron, and giving you
    to understand unutterable somethings, longings for Lethe and all
    that—far from it! I never committed murders, and sleep the soundest
    of sleeps—but 'the heart is desperately wicked,' that is true, and
    though I dare not say 'I know' mine, yet I have had signal
    opportunities, I who began life from the beginning, and can forget
    nothing (but names, and the date of the battle of Waterloo), and have
    known good and wicked men and women, gentle and simple, shaking hands
    with Edmund Kean and Father Mathew, you and—Ottima! Then, I had a
    certain faculty of self-consciousness, years and years ago, at which
    John Mill wondered, and which ought to be improved by this time, if
    constant use helps at all—and, meaning, on the whole, to be a Poet,
    if not the Poet ... for I am vain and ambitious some nights,—I do
    myself justice, and dare call things by their names to myself, and say
    boldly, this I love, this I hate, this I would do, this I would not
    do, under all kinds of circumstances,—and talking (thinking) in this
    style to myself, and beginning, however tremblingly, in spite of
    conviction, to write in this style for myself—on the top of the
    desk which contains my 'Songs of the Poets—no. i M.P.', I
    wrote,—what you now forgive, I know! Because I am, from my heart,
    sorry that by a foolish fit of inconsideration I should have given
    pain for a minute to you, towards whom, on every account, I would
    rather soften and 'sleeken every word as to a bird' ... (and, not such
    a bird as my black self that go screeching about the world for 'dead
    horse'—corvus (picus)—mirandola!) I, too, who have been at such
    pains to acquire the reputation I enjoy in the world,—(ask Mr.
    Kenyon,) and who dine, and wine, and dance and enhance the company's
    pleasure till they make me ill and I keep house, as of late: Mr.
    Kenyon, (for I only quote where you may verify if you please) he
    says my common sense strikes him, and its contrast with my muddy
    metaphysical poetry! And so it shall strike you—for though I am glad
    that, since you did misunderstand me, you said so, and have given me
    an opportunity of doing by another way what I wished to do in
    that,—yet, if you had not alluded to my writing, as I meant you
    should not, you would have certainly understood something of its
    drift when you found me next Tuesday precisely the same quiet (no, for
    I feel I speak too loudly, in spite of your kind disclaimer, but—)
    the same mild man-about-town you were gracious to, the other
    morning—for, indeed, my own way of worldly life is marked out long
    ago, as precisely as yours can be, and I am set going with a hand,
    winker-wise, on each side of my head, and a directing finger before my
    eyes, to say nothing of an instinctive dread I have that a certain
    whip-lash is vibrating somewhere in the neighbourhood in playful
    readiness! So 'I hope here be proofs,' Dogberry's satisfaction that,
    first, I am but a very poor creature compared to you and entitled by
    my wants to look up to you,—all I meant to say from the first of the
    first—and that, next, I shall be too much punished if, for this piece
    of mere inconsideration, you deprive me, more or less, or sooner or
    later, of the pleasure of seeing you,—a little over boisterous
    gratitude for which, perhaps, caused all the mischief! The reasons you
    give for deferring my visits next week are too cogent for me to
    dispute—that is too true—and, being now and henceforward 'on my good
    behaviour,' I will at once cheerfully submit to them, if needs
    must—but should your mere kindness and forethought, as I half
    suspect, have induced you to take such a step, you will now smile with
    me, at this new and very unnecessary addition to the 'fears of me' I
    have got so triumphantly over in your case! Wise man, was I not, to
    clench my first favourable impression so adroitly ... like a recent
    Cambridge worthy, my sister heard of; who, being on his theological
    (or rather, scripture-historical) examination, was asked by the Tutor,
    who wished to let him off easily, 'who was the first King of
    Israel?'—'Saul' answered the trembling youth. 'Good!' nodded
    approvingly the Tutor. 'Otherwise called Paul,' subjoined the youth
    in his elation! Now I have begged pardon, and blushingly assured you
    that was only a slip of the tongue, and that I did really mean all
    the while, (Paul or no Paul), the veritable son of Kish, he that owned
    the asses, and found listening to the harp the best of all things for
    an evil spirit! Pray write me a line to say, 'Oh ... if that's all!'
    and remember me for good (which is very compatible with a moment's
    stupidity) and let me not for one fault, (and that the only one that
    shall be), lose any pleasure ... for your friendship I am sure I
    have not lost—God bless you, my dear friend!

R. Browning.


    And by the way, will it not be better, as co-operating with you more
    effectually in your kind promise to forget the 'printer's error' in my
    blotted proof, to send me back that same 'proof,' if you have not
    inflicted proper and summary justice on it? When Mephistopheles last
    came to see us in this world outside here, he counselled sundry of us
    'never to write a letter,—and never to burn one'—do you know that?
    But I never mind what I am told! Seriously, I am ashamed.... I shall
    next ask a servant for my paste in the 'high fantastical' style of my
    own 'Luria.'


