
Sunday
[May 25, 1845].


    I owe you the most humble of apologies dear Mr. Browning, for having
    spent so much solemnity on so simple a matter, and I hasten to pay it;
    confessing at the same time (as why should I not?) that I am quite as
    much ashamed of myself as I ought to be, which is not a little. You
    will find it difficult to believe me perhaps when I assure you that I
    never made such a mistake (I mean of over-seriousness to indefinite
    compliments), no, never in my life before—indeed my sisters have
    often jested with me (in matters of which they were cognizant) on my
    supernatural indifference to the superlative degree in general, as if
    it meant nothing in grammar. I usually know well that 'boots' may be
    called for in this world of ours, just as you called for yours; and
    that to bring 'Bootes,' were the vilest of mal-à-pro-pos-ities.
    Also, I should have understood 'boots' where you wrote it, in the
    letter in question; if it had not been for the relation of two
    things in it—and now I perfectly seem to see how I mistook that
    relation; ('seem to see'; because I have not looked into the letter
    again since your last night's commentary, and will not—) inasmuch as
    I have observed before in my own mind, that a good deal of what is
    called obscurity in you, arises from a habit of very subtle
    association; so subtle, that you are probably unconscious of it, ...
    and the effect of which is to throw together on the same level and in
    the same light, things of likeness and unlikeness—till the reader
    grows confused as I did, and takes one for another. I may say however,
    in a poor justice to myself, that I wrote what I wrote so
    unfortunately, through reverence for you, and not at all from vanity
    in my own account ... although I do feel palpably while I write these
    words here and now, that I might as well leave them unwritten; for
    that no man of the world who ever lived in the world (not even you)
    could be expected to believe them, though said, sung, and sworn.


    For the rest, it is scarcely an apposite moment for you to talk, even
    'dramatically,' of my 'superiority' to you, ... unless you mean, which
    perhaps you do mean, my superiority in simplicity—and, verily, to
    some of the 'adorable ingenuousness,' sacred to the shade of Simpson,
    I may put in a modest claim, ... 'and have my claim allowed.' 'Pray do
    not mock me' I quote again from your Shakespeare to you who are a
    dramatic poet; ... and I will admit anything that you like, (being
    humble just now)—even that I did not know you. I was certainly
    innocent of the knowledge of the 'ice and cold water' you introduce me
    to, and am only just shaking my head, as Flush would, after a first
    wholesome plunge. Well—if I do not know you, I shall learn, I
    suppose, in time. I am ready to try humbly to learn—and I may
    perhaps—if you are not done in Sanscrit, which is too hard for me,
    ... notwithstanding that I had the pleasure yesterday to hear, from
    America, of my profound skill in 'various languages less known than
    Hebrew'!—a liberal paraphrase on Mr. Horne's large fancies on the
    like subject, and a satisfactory reputation in itself—as long as it
    is not necessary to deserve it. So I here enclose to you your letter
    back again, as you wisely desire; although you never could doubt, I
    hope, for a moment, of its safety with me in the completest of senses:
    and then, from the heights of my superior ... stultity, and other
    qualities of the like order, ... I venture to advise you ... however
    (to speak of the letter critically, and as the dramatic composition it
    is) it is to be admitted to be very beautiful, and well worthy of the
    rest of its kin in the portfolio, ... 'Lays of the Poets,' or
    otherwise, ... I venture to advise you to burn it at once. And then,
    my dear friend, I ask you (having some claim) to burn at the same time
    the letter I was fortunate enough to write to you on Friday, and this
    present one—don't send them back to me; I hate to have letters sent
    back—but burn them for me and never mind Mephistopheles. After which
    friendly turn, you will do me the one last kindness of forgetting all
    this exquisite nonsense, and of refraining from mentioning it, by
    breath or pen, to me or another. Now I trust you so far:—you will
    put it with the date of the battle of Waterloo—and I, with every date
    in chronology; seeing that I can remember none of them. And we will
    shuffle the cards and take patience, and begin the game again, if you
    please—and I shall bear in mind that you are a dramatic poet, which
    is not the same thing, by any means, with us of the primitive
    simplicities, who don't tread on cothurns nor shift the mask in the
    scene. And I will reverence you both as 'a poet' and as 'the poet';
    because it is no false 'ambition,' but a right you have—and one which
    those who live longest, will see justified to the uttermost.... In the
    meantime I need not ask Mr. Kenyon if you have any sense, because I
    have no doubt that you have quite sense enough—and even if I had a
    doubt, I shall prefer judging for myself without interposition; which
    I can do, you know, as long as you like to come and see me. And you
    can come this week if you do like it—because our relations don't come
    till the end of it, it appears—not that I made a pretence 'out of
    kindness'—pray don't judge me so outrageously—but if you like to
    come ... not on Tuesday ... but on Wednesday at three o'clock, I shall
    be very glad to see you; and I, for one, shall have forgotten
    everything by that time; being quick at forgetting my own faults
    usually. If Wednesday does not suit you, I am not sure that I can
    see you this week—but it depends on circumstances. Only don't think
    yourself obliged to come on Wednesday. You know I began by
    entreating you to be open and sincere with me—and no more—I
    require no 'sleekening of every word.' I love the truth and can bear
    it—whether in word or deed—and those who have known me longest would
    tell you so fullest. Well!—May God bless you. We shall know each
    other some day perhaps—and I am

Always and faithfully your friend,
E.B.B.


