
Monday Morning.
[Post-mark, May 27, 1845.]


    You will think me the most changeable of all the changeable; but
    indeed it is not my fault that I cannot, as I wished, receive you on
    Wednesday. There was a letter this morning; and our friends not only
    come to London but come to this house on Tuesday (to-morrow) to pass
    two or three days, until they settle in an hotel for the rest of the
    season. Therefore you see, it is doubtful whether the two days may not
    be three, and the three days four; but if they go away in time, and
    if Saturday should suit you, I will let you know by a word; and you
    can answer by a yea or nay. While they are in the house, I must give
    them what time I can—and indeed, it is something to dread altogether.

Tuesday.


    I send you the note I had begun before receiving yours of last night,
    and also a fragment18 from Mrs. Hedley's herein enclosed, a full and
    complete certificate, ... that you may know ... quite know, ... what
    the real and only reason of the obstacle to Wednesday is. On Saturday
    perhaps, or on Monday more certainly, there is likely to be no
    opposition, ... at least not on the 'côté gauche' (my side!) to our
    meeting—but I will let you know more.


    For the rest, we have both been a little unlucky, there's no denying,
    in overcoming the embarrassments of a first acquaintance—but suffer
    me to say as one other last word, (and quite, quite the last this
    time!) in case there should have been anything approaching, however
    remotely, to a distrustful or unkind tone in what I wrote on Sunday,
    (and I have a sort of consciousness that in the process of my
    self-scorning I was not in the most sabbatical of moods perhaps—)
    that I do recall and abjure it, and from my heart entreat your pardon
    for it, and profess, notwithstanding it, neither to 'choose' nor 'to
    be able' to think otherwise of you than I have done, ... as of one
    most generous and most loyal; for that if I chose, I could not;
    and that if I could, I should not choose.

Ever and gratefully your friend,
E.B.B.


    —And now we shall hear of 'Luria,' shall we not? and much besides.
    And Miss Mitford has sent me the most high comical of letters to
    read, addressed to her by 'R.B. Haydon historical painter' which has
    made me quite laugh; and would make you; expressing his righteous
    indignation at the 'great fact' and gross impropriety of any man who
    has 'thoughts too deep for tears' agreeing to wear a 'bag-wig' ... the
    case of poor Wordsworth's going to court, you know.—Mr. Haydon being
    infinitely serious all the time, and yet holding the doctrine of the
    divine right of princes in his left hand.


    How is your head? may I be hoping the best for it? May God bless you.


