
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, June 7, 1845.]


    When I see all you have done for me in this 'Prometheus,' I feel more
    than half ashamed both of it and of me for using your time so, and
    forced to say in my own defence (not to you but myself) that I never
    thought of meaning to inflict such work on you who might be doing so
    much better things in the meantime both for me and for
    others—because, you see, it is not the mere reading of the MS., but
    the 'comparing' of the text, and the melancholy comparisons between
    the English and the Greek, ... quite enough to turn you from your
    φιλανθρωπου τροπου that I brought upon you; and indeed I
    did not mean so much, nor so soon! Yet as you have done it for me—for
    me who expected a few jottings down with a pencil and a general
    opinion; it is of course of the greatest value, besides the pleasure
    and pride which come of it; and I must say of the translation, (before
    putting it aside for the nonce), that the circumstance of your paying
    it so much attention and seeing any good in it, is quite enough reward
    for the writer and quite enough motive for self-gratulation, if it
    were all torn to fragments at this moment—which is a foolish thing to
    say because it is so obvious, and because you would know it if I said
    it or not.


    And while you were doing this for me, you thought it unkind of me not
    to write to you; yes, and you think me at this moment the very
    princess of apologies and excuses and depreciations and all the rest
    of the small family of distrust—or of hypocrisy ... who knows? Well!
    but you are wrong ... wrong ... to think so; and you will let me say
    one word to show where you are wrong—not for you to controvert, ...
    because it must relate to myself especially, and lies beyond your
    cognizance, and is something which I must know best after all. And
    it is, ... that you persist in putting me into a false position, with
    respect to fixing days and the like, and in making me feel somewhat
    as I did when I was a child, and Papa used to put me up on the
    chimney-piece and exhort me to stand up straight like a hero, which I
    did, straighter and straighter, and then suddenly 'was 'ware' (as we
    say in the ballads) of the walls' growing alive behind me and
    extending two stony hands to push me down that frightful precipice to
    the rug, where the dog lay ... dear old Havannah, ... and where he and
    I were likely to be dashed to pieces together and mix our uncanonised
    bones. Now my present false position ... which is not the
    chimney-piece's, ... is the necessity you provide for me in the shape
    of my having to name this day, or that day, ... and of your coming
    because I name it, and of my having to think and remember that you
    come because I name it. Through a weakness, perhaps, or morbidness, or
    one knows not how to define it, I cannot help being uncomfortable in
    having to do this,—it is impossible. Not that I distrust you—you
    are the last in the world I could distrust: and then (although you may
    be sceptical) I am naturally given to trust ... to a fault ... as some
    say, or to a sin, as some reproach me:—and then again, if I were ever
    such a distruster, it could not be of you. But if you knew me—! I
    will tell you! if one of my brothers omits coming to this room for two
    days, ... I never ask why it happened! if my own father omits coming
    up-stairs to say 'good night,' I never say a word; and not from
    indifference. Do try to make out these readings of me as a dixit
    Casaubonus; and don't throw me down as a corrupt text, nor convict me
    for an infidel which I am not. On the contrary I am grateful and happy
    to believe that you like to come here; and even if you came here as a
    pure act of charity and pity to me, as long as you chose to come I
    should not be too proud to be grateful and happy still. I could not be
    proud to you, and I hope you will not fancy such a possibility,
    which is the remotest of all. Yes, and I am anxious to ask you to be
    wholly generous and leave off such an interpreting philosophy as you
    made use of yesterday, and forgive me when I beg you to fix your own
    days for coming for the future. Will you? It is the same thing in one
    way. If you like to come really every week, there is no hindrance to
    it—you can do it—and the privilege and obligation remain equally
    mine:—and if you name a day for coming on any week, where there is an
    obstacle on my side, you will learn it from me in a moment. Why I
    might as well charge you with distrusting me, because you persist
    in making me choose the days. And it is not for me to do it, but for
    you—I must feel that—and I cannot help chafing myself against the
    thought that for me to begin to fix days in this way, just because you
    have quick impulses (like all imaginative persons), and wish me to do
    it now, may bring me to the catastrophe of asking you to come when you
    would rather not, ... which, as you say truly, would not be an
    important vexation to you; but to me would be worse than vexation; to
    me—and therefore I shrink from the very imagination of the
    possibility of such a thing, and ask you to bear with me and let it be
    as I prefer ... left to your own choice of the moment. And bear with
    me above all—because this shows no want of faith in you ... none ...
    but comes from a simple fact (with its ramifications) ... that you
    know little of me personally yet, and that you guess, even, but very
    little of the influence of a peculiar experience over me and out of
    me; and if I wanted a proof of this, we need not seek further than the
    very point of discussion, and the hard worldly thoughts you thought I
    was thinking of you yesterday,—I, who thought not one of them! But I
    am so used to discern the correcting and ministering angels by the
    same footsteps on the ground, that it is not wonderful I should look
    down there at any approach of a φιλια ταξις whatever to this
    personal me. Have I not been ground down to browns and blacks? and
    is it my fault if I am not green? Not that it is my complaint—I
    should not be justified in complaining; I believe, as I told you, that
    there is more gladness than sadness in the world—that is, generally:
    and if some natures have to be refined by the sun, and some by the
    furnace (the less genial ones) both means are to be recognised as
    good, ... however different in pleasurableness and painfulness, and
    though furnace-fire leaves scorched streaks upon the fruit. I assured
    you there was nothing I had any power of teaching you: and there is
    nothing, except grief!—which I would not teach you, you know, if I
    had the occasion granted.


    It is a multitude of words about nothing at all, ... this—but I am
    like Mariana in the moated grange and sit listening too often to the
    mouse in the wainscot. Be as forbearing as you can—and believe how
    profoundly it touches me that you should care to come here at all,
    much more, so often! and try to understand that if I did not write as
    you half asked, it was just because I failed at the moment to get up
    enough pomp and circumstance to write on purpose to certify the
    important fact of my being a little stronger or a little weaker on one
    particular morning. That I am always ready and rejoiced to write to
    you, you know perfectly well, and I have proved, by 'superfluity of
    naughtiness' and prolixity through some twenty posts:—and this, and
    therefore, you will agree altogether to attribute no more to me on
    these counts, and determine to read me no more backwards with your
    Hebrew, putting in your own vowel points without my leave! Shall it be
    so?


    Here is a letter grown from a note which it meant to be—and I have
    been interrupted in the midst of it, or it should have gone to you
    earlier. Let what I have said in it of myself pass unquestioned and
    unnoticed, because it is of me and not of you, ... and, if in any
    wise lunatical, all the talking and writing in the world will not put
    the implied moon into another quarter. Only be patient with me a
    little, ... and let us have a smooth ground for the poems which I am
    foreseeing the sight of with such pride and delight—Such pride and
    delight!


    And one thing ... which is chief, though it seems to come last!... you
    will have advice (will you not?) if that pain does not grow much
    better directly? It cannot be prudent or even safe to let a pain in
    the head go on so long, and no remedy be attempted for it, ... and you
    cannot be sure that it is a merely nervous pain and that it may not
    have consequences; and this, quite apart from the consideration of
    suffering. So you will see some one with an opinion to give, and take
    it? Do, I beseech you. You will not say 'no'? Also ... if on
    Wednesday you should be less well than usual, you will come on
    Thursday instead, I hope, ... seeing that it must be right for you to
    be quiet and silent when you suffer so, and a journey into London can
    let you be neither. Otherwise, I hold to my day, ... Wednesday. And
    may God bless you my dear friend.

Ever yours,
E.B.B.


    You are right I see, nearly everywhere, if not quite everywhere in the
    criticisms—but of course I have not looked very closely—that is, I
    have read your papers but not in connection with a my side of the
    argument—but I shall lose the post after all.


