
[Post-mark, June 9, 1845.]


    Just after my note left, yours came—I will try so to answer it as to
    please you; and I begin by promising cheerfully to do all you bid me
    about naming days &c. I do believe we are friends now and for ever.
    There can be no reason, therefore, that I should cling tenaciously to
    any one or other time of meeting, as if, losing that, I lost
    everything—and, for the future, I will provide against sudden
    engagements, outrageous weather &c., to your heart's content. Nor am I
    going to except against here and there a little wrong I could get up,
    as when you imply from my quick impulses and the like. No, my dear
    friend—for I seem sure I shall have quite, quite time enough to do
    myself justice in your eyes—Let time show!


    Perhaps I feel none the less sorely, when you 'thank' me for such
    company as mine, that I cannot avoid confessing to myself that it
    would not be so absolutely out of my power, perhaps, to contrive
    really and deserve thanks in a certain acceptation—I might really
    try, at all events, and amuse you a little better, when I do have
    the opportunity,—and I do not—but there is the thing! It is all of
    a piece—I do not seek your friendship in order to do you good—any
    good—only to do myself good. Though I would, God knows, do that
    too.


    Enough of this.


    I am much better, indeed,—but will certainly follow your advice
    should the pain return. And you—you have tried a new journey from
    your room, have you not?


    Do recollect, at any turn, any chance so far in my favour,—that I am
    here and yours should you want any fetching and carrying in this
    outside London world. Your brothers may have their own business to
    mind, Mr. Kenyon is at New York, we will suppose; here am I—what
    else, what else makes me count my cleverness to you, as I know I
    have done more than once, by word and letter, but the real wish to be
    set at work? I should have, I hope, better taste than to tell any
    everyday acquaintance, who could not go out, one single morning even,
    on account of a headache, that the weather was delightful, much less
    that I had been walking five miles and meant to run ten—yet to you I
    boasted once of polking and waltzing and more—but then would it not
    be a very superfluous piece of respect in the four-footed bird to keep
    his wings to himself because his Master Oceanos could fly forsooth?
    Whereas he begins to wave a flap and show how ready they are to be
    off—for what else were the good of him? Think of this—and

Know me for yours
R.B.


    For good you are, to those notes—you shall have more,—that is, the
    rest—on Wednesday then, at 3, except as you except. God bless you.


    Oh, let me tell you—I suppose Mr. Horne must be in town—as I
    received a letter two days ago, from the contriver of some literary
    society or other who had before written to get me to belong to it,
    protesting against my reasons for refusing, and begging that 'at all
    events I would suspend my determination till I had been visited by Mr.
    H. on the subject'—and, as they can hardly mean to bring him express
    from the Drachenfels for just that, he is returned no doubt—and as he
    is your friend, I take the opportunity of mentioning the course I
    shall pursue with him or any other friend of yours I may meet,—(and
    everybody else, I may add—) the course I understand you to desire,
    with respect to our own intimacy. While I may acknowledge, I believe,
    that I correspond with you, I shall not, in any case, suffer it to be
    known that I see, or have seen you. This I just remind you of, lest
    any occasion of embarrassment should arise, for a moment, from your
    not being quite sure how I had acted in any case.—Con che, le bacio
    le mani—a rivederla!


