
Tuesday Morning.
[Post-mark, June 10, 1845.]


    I must thank you by one word for all your kindness and
    consideration—which could not be greater; nor more felt by me. In the
    first place, afterwards (if that should not be Irish dialect) do
    understand that my letter passed from my hands to go to yours on
    Friday, but was thrown aside carelessly down stairs and 'covered up'
    they say, so as not to be seen until late on Saturday; and I can only
    humbly hope to have been cross enough about it (having conscientiously
    tried) to secure a little more accuracy another time.—And then, ...
    if ever I should want anything done or found, ... (a roc's egg or the
    like) you may believe me that I shall not scruple to ask you to be the
    finder; but at this moment I want nothing, indeed, except your poems;
    and that is quite the truth. Now do consider and think what I could
    possibly want in your 'outside London world'; you, who are the 'Genius
    of the lamp'!—Why if you light it and let me read your romances, &c.,
    by it, is not that the best use for it, and am I likely to look for
    another? Only I shall remember what you say, gratefully and seriously;
    and if ever I should have a good fair opportunity of giving you
    trouble (as if I had not done it already!), you may rely upon my evil
    intentions; even though dear Mr. Kenyon should not actually be at New
    York, ... which he is not, I am glad to say, as I saw him on Saturday.


    Which reminds me that he knows of your having been here, of course!
    and will not mention it; as he understood from me that you would
    not.—Thank you! Also there was an especial reason which constrained
    me, on pain of appearing a great hypocrite, to tell Miss Mitford the
    bare fact of my having seen you—and reluctantly I did it, though
    placing some hope in her promise of discretion. And how necessary the
    discretion is, will appear in the awful statistical fact of our having
    at this moment, as my sisters were calculating yesterday, some forty
    relations in London—to say nothing of the right wing of the enemy.
    For Mr. Horne, I could have told you, and really I thought I had
    told you of his being in England.


    Last paragraph of all is, that I don't want to be amused, ... or
    rather that I am amused by everything and anything. Why surely,
    surely, you have some singular ideas about me! So, till to-morrow,

E.B.B.


    Instead of writing this note to you yesterday, as should have been, I
    went down-stairs—or rather was carried—and am not the worse.


