
Friday.
[Post-mark, June 14, 1845.]


    Yes, the poem is too good in certain respects for the prizes given
    in colleges, (when all the pure parsley goes naturally to the
    rabbits), and has a great deal of beauty here and there in image and
    expression. Still I do not quite agree with you that it reaches the
    Tennyson standard any wise; and for the blank verse, I cannot for a
    moment think it comparable to one of the grand passages in 'Oenone,'
    and 'Arthur' and the like. In fact I seem to hear more in that latter
    blank verse than you do, ... to hear not only a 'mighty line' as in
    Marlowe, but a noble full orbicular wholeness in complete
    passages—which always struck me as the mystery of music and great
    peculiarity in Tennyson's versification, inasmuch as he attains to
    these complete effects without that shifting of the pause practised by
    the masters, ... Shelley and others. A 'linked music' in which there
    are no links!—that, you would take to be a contradiction—and yet
    something like that, my ear has always seemed to perceive; and I have
    wondered curiously again and again how there could be so much union
    and no fastening. Only of course it is not model versification—and
    for dramatic purposes, it must be admitted to be bad.


    Which reminds me to be astonished for the second time how you could
    think such a thing of me as that I wanted to read only your lyrics,
    ... or that I 'preferred the lyrics' ... or something barbarous in
    that way? You don't think me 'ambidexter,' or 'either-handed' ... and
    both hands open for what poems you will vouchsafe to me; and yet if
    you would let me see anything you may have in a readable state by you,
    ... 'The Flight of the Duchess' ... or act or scene of 'The Soul's
    Tragedy,' ... I shall be so glad and grateful to you! Oh—if you
    change your mind and choose to be bien prié, I will grant it is your
    right, and begin my liturgy directly. But this is not teazing (in the
    intention of it!) and I understand all about the transcription, and
    the inscrutableness of rough copies,—that is, if you write as I do,
    so that my guardian angel or M. Champollion cannot read what is
    written. Only whatever they can, (remember!) I can: and you are not
    to mind trusting me with the cacistography possible to mortal readers.


    The sun shines so that nobody dares complain of the east wind—and
    indeed I am better altogether. May God bless you, my dear friend.

E.B.B.


