
[Post-mark, June 14, 1845.]


    When I ask my wise self what I really do remember of the Prize poem,
    the answer is—both of Chapman's lines a-top, quite worth any prize
    for their quoter—then, the good epithet of 'Green Europe' contrasting
    with Africa—then, deep in the piece, a picture of a Vestal in a
    vault, where I see a dipping and winking lamp plainest, and last of
    all the ominous 'all was dark' that dismisses you. I read the poem
    many years ago, and never since, though I have an impression that the
    versification is good, yet from your commentary I see I must have said
    a good deal more in its praise than that. But have you not discovered
    by this time that I go on talking with my thoughts away?


    I know, I have always been jealous of my own musical faculty (I can
    write music).—Now that I see the uselessness of such jealousy, and am
    for loosing and letting it go, it may be cramped possibly. Your music
    is more various and exquisite than any modern writer's to my ear. One
    should study the mechanical part of the art, as nearly all that there
    is to be studied—for the more one sits and thinks over the creative
    process, the more it confirms itself as 'inspiration,' nothing more
    nor less. Or, at worst, you write down old inspirations, what you
    remember of them ... but with that it begins. 'Reflection' is
    exactly what it names itself—a re-presentation, in scattered rays
    from every angle of incidence, of what first of all became present in
    a great light, a whole one. So tell me how these lights are born, if
    you can! But I can tell anybody how to make melodious verses—let him
    do it therefore—it should be exacted of all writers.


    You do not understand what a new feeling it is for me to have someone
    who is to like my verses or I shall not ever like them after! So far
    differently was I circumstanced of old, that I used rather to go about
    for a subject of offence to people; writing ugly things in order to
    warn the ungenial and timorous off my grounds at once. I shall never
    do so again at least! As it is, I will bring all I dare, in as great
    quantities as I can—if not next time, after then—certainly. I must
    make an end, print this Autumn my last four 'Bells,' Lyrics, Romances,
    'The Tragedy,' and 'Luna,' and then go on with a whole heart to my own
    Poem—indeed, I have just resolved not to begin any new song, even,
    till this grand clearance is made—I will get the Tragedy transcribed
    to bring—


    'To bring!' Next Wednesday—if you know how happy you make me! may I
    not say that, my dear friend, when I feel it from my soul?


    I thank God that you are better: do pray make fresh endeavours to
    profit by this partial respite of the weather! All about you must urge
    that: but even from my distance some effect might come of such wishes.
    But you are better—look so and speak so! God bless you.

R.B.


    You let 'flowers be sent you in a letter,' every one knows, and this
    hot day draws out our very first yellow rose.


