
Monday.
[Post-mark, June 17, 1845.]


    Yes, I quite believe as you do that what is called the 'creative
    process' in works of Art, is just inspiration and no less—which made
    somebody say to me not long since; And so you think that Shakespeare's
    'Othello' was of the effluence of the Holy Ghost?'—rather a startling
    deduction, ... only not quite as final as might appear to somebodies
    perhaps. At least it does not prevent my going on to agree with the
    saying of Spiridion, ... do you remember?... 'Tout ce que l'homme
    appelle inspiration, je l'appelle aussi revelation,' ... if there is
    not something too self-evident in it after all—my sole objection! And
    is it not true that your inability to analyse the mental process in
    question, is one of the proofs of the fact of inspiration?—as the
    gods were known of old by not being seen to move their feet,—coming
    and going in an equal sweep of radiance.—And still more wonderful
    than the first transient great light you speak of, ... and far beyond
    any work of reflection, except in the pure analytical sense in which
    you use the word, ... appears that gathering of light on light upon
    particular points, as you go (in composition) step by step, till you
    get intimately near to things, and see them in a fullness and
    clearness, and an intense trust in the truth of them which you have
    not in any sunshine of noon (called real!) but which you have then
    ... and struggle to communicate:—an ineffectual struggle with most
    writers (oh, how ineffectual!) and when effectual, issuing in the
    'Pippa Passes,' and other master-pieces of the world.


    You will tell me what you mean exactly by being jealous of your own
    music? You said once that you had had a false notion of music, or had
    practised it according to the false notions of other people: but did
    you mean besides that you ever had meant to despise music
    altogether—because that, it is hard to set about trying to believe
    of you indeed. And then, you can praise my verses for music?—Why,
    are you aware that people blame me constantly for wanting
    harmony—from Mr. Boyd who moans aloud over the indisposition of my
    'trochees' ... and no less a person than Mr. Tennyson, who said to
    somebody who repeated it, that in the want of harmony lay the chief
    defect of the poems, 'although it might verily be retrieved, as he
    could fancy that I had an ear by nature.' Well—but I am pleased that
    you should praise me—right or wrong—I mean, whether I am right or
    wrong in being pleased! and I say so to you openly, although my belief
    is that you are under a vow to our Lady of Loretto to make giddy with
    all manner of high vanities, some head, ... not too strong for such
    things, but too low for them, ... before you see again the embroidery
    on her divine petticoat. Only there's a flattery so far beyond praise
    ... even your praise—as where you talk of your verses being liked
    &c., and of your being happy to bring them here, ... that is scarcely
    a lawful weapon; and see if the Madonna may not signify so much to
    you!—Seriously, you will not hurry too uncomfortably, or
    uncomfortably at all, about the transcribing? Another day, you know,
    will do as well—and patience is possible to me, if not 'native to the
    soil.'


    Also I am behaving very well in going out into the noise; not quite
    out of doors yet, on account of the heat—and I am better as you say,
    without any doubt at all, and stronger—only my looks are a little
    deceitful; and people are apt to be heated and flushed in this
    weather, one hour, to look a little more ghastly an hour or two after.
    Not that it is not true of me that I am better, mind! Because I am.


    The 'flower in the letter' was from one of my sisters—from Arabel
    (though many of these poems are ideal ... will you understand?) and
    your rose came quite alive and fresh, though in act of dropping its
    beautiful leaves, because of having to come to me instead of living on
    in your garden, as it intended. But I thank you—for this, and all, my
    dear friend.

E.B.B.


