
Monday.
[Post-mark, June 24, 1845.]


    I had begun to be afraid that I did not deserve to have my questions
    answered; and I was afraid of asking them over again. But it is worse
    to be afraid that you are not better at all in any essential manner
    (after all your assurances) and that the medical means have failed so
    far. Did you go to somebody who knows anything?—because there is no
    excuse, you see, in common sense, for not having the best and most
    experienced opinion when there is a choice of advice—and I am
    confident that that pain should not be suffered to go on without
    something being done. What I said about nerves, related to what you
    had told me of your mother's suffering and what you had fancied of the
    relation of it to your own, and not that I could be thinking about
    imaginary complaints—I wish I could. Not (either) that I believe in
    the relation ... because such things are not hereditary, are they? and
    the bare coincidence is improbable. Well, but, I wanted particularly
    to say this—Don't bring the 'Duchess' with you on Wednesday. I
    shall not expect anything, I write distinctly to tell you—and I would
    far far rather that you did not bring it. You see it is just as I
    thought—for that whether too much thought or study did or did not
    bring on the illness, ... yet you admit that reading and writing
    increase it ... as they would naturally do any sort of pain in the
    head—therefore if you will but be in earnest and try to get well
    first, we will do the 'Bells' afterwards, and there will be time for
    a whole peal of them, I hope and trust, before the winter. Now do
    admit that this is reasonable, and agree reasonably to it. And if it
    does you good to go out and take exercise, why not go out and take it?
    nay, why not go away and take it? Why not try the effect of a little
    change of air—or even of a great change of air—if it should be
    necessary, or even expedient? Anything is better, you know ... or if
    you don't know, I know—than to be ill, really, seriously—I mean
    for you to be ill, who have so much to do and to enjoy in the world
    yet ... and all those bells waiting to be hung! So that if you will
    agree to be well first, I will promise to be ready afterwards to help
    you in any thing I can do ... transcribing or anything ... to get the
    books through the press in the shortest of times—and I am capable of
    a great deal of that sort of work without being tired, having the
    habit of writing in any sort of position, and the long habit, ...
    since, before I was ill even, I never used to write at a table (or
    scarcely ever) but on the arm of a chair, or on the seat of one,
    sitting myself on the floor, and calling myself a Lollard for dignity.
    So you will put by your 'Duchess' ... will you not? or let me see just
    that one sheet—if one should be written—which is finished? ... up to
    this moment, you understand? finished now.


    And if I have tired and teazed you with all these words it is a bad
    opportunity to take—and yet I will persist in saying through good and
    bad opportunities that I never did 'give cause' as you say, to your
    being 'suspicious of my suspiciousness' as I believe I said before. I
    deny my 'suspiciousness' altogether—it is not one of my faults. Nor
    is it quite my fault that you and I should always be quarrelling about
    over-appreciations and under-appreciations—and after all I have no
    interest nor wish, I do assure you, to depreciate myself—and you are
    not to think that I have the remotest claim to the Monthyon prize for
    good deeds in the way of modesty of self-estimation. Only when I know
    you better, as you talk of ... and when you know me too well, ...
    the right and the wrong of these conclusions will appear in a fuller
    light than ever so much arguing can produce now. Is it unkindly
    written of me? no—I feel it is not!—and that 'now and ever we
    are friends,' (just as you think) I think besides and am happy in
    thinking so, and could not be distrustful of you if I tried. So may
    God bless you, my ever dear friend—and mind to forget the 'Duchess'
    and to remember every good counsel!—Not that I do particularly
    confide in the medical oracles. They never did much more for me
    than, when my pulse was above a hundred and forty with fever, to give
    me digitalis to make me weak—and, when I could not move without
    fainting (with weakness), to give me quinine to make me feverish
    again. Yes—and they could tell from the stethoscope, how very little
    was really wrong in me ... if it were not on a vital organ—and how I
    should certainly live ... if I didn't die sooner. But then, nothing
    has power over affections of the chest, except God and his
    winds—and I do hope that an obvious quick remedy may be found for
    your head. But do give up the writing and all that does harm!—

Ever yours, my dear friend,
E.B.B.


    Miss Mitford talked of spending Wednesday with me—and I have put it
    off to Thursday:—and if you should hear from Mr. Chorley that he is
    coming to see her and me together on any day, do understand that it
    was entirely her proposition and not mine, and that certainly it won't
    be acceded to, as far as I am concerned; as I have explained to her
    finally. I have been vexed about it—but she can see him down-stairs
    as she has done before—and if she calls me perverse and capricious
    (which she will do) I shall stop the reflection by thanking her again
    and again (as I can do sincerely) for her kindness and goodness in
    coming to see me herself, so far!—


