
Tuesday Evening.
[Post-mark, June 25, 1845.]


    What will you think when I write to ask you not to come to-morrow,
    Wednesday; but ... on Friday perhaps, instead? But do see how it is;
    and judge if it is to be helped.


    I have waited hour after hour, hoping to hear from Miss Mitford that
    she would agree to take Thursday in change for Wednesday,—and just as
    I begin to wonder whether she can have received my letter at all, or
    whether she may not have been vexed by it into taking a vengeance and
    adhering to her own devices; (for it appealed to her esprit de sexe on
    the undeniable axiom of women having their way ... and she might
    choose to act it out!) just as I wonder over all this, and consider
    what a confusion of the elements it would be if you came and found her
    here, and Mr. Chorley at the door perhaps, waiting for some of the
    light of her countenance;—comes a note from Mr. Kenyon, to the
    effect that he will be here at four o'clock P.M.—and comes a final
    note from my aunt Mrs. Hedley (supposed to be at Brighton for several
    months) to the effect that she will be here at twelve o'clock, M.!!
    So do observe the constellation of adverse stars ... or the covey of
    'bad birds,' as the Romans called them, and that there is no choice,
    but to write as I am writing. It can't be helped—can it? For take
    away the doubt about Miss Mitford, and Mr. Kenyon remains—and take
    away Mr. Kenyon, and there is Mrs. Hedley—and thus it must be for
    Friday ... which will learn to be a fortunate day for the
    nonce—unless Saturday should suit you better. I do not speak of
    Thursday, because of the doubt about Miss Mitford—and if any harm
    should happen to Friday, I will write again; but if you do not hear
    again, and are able to come then, you will come perhaps then.


    In the meantime I thank you for the better news in your note—if it is
    really, really to be trusted in—but you know, you have said so often
    that you were better and better, without being really better, that it
    makes people ... 'suspicious.' Yet it is full amends for the
    disappointment to hope ... here I must break off or be too late. May
    God bless you my dear friend.

E.B.B.


