
Tuesday Morning.


    How are you—may I hope to hear soon?


    I don't know exactly what possessed me to set my next day so far off
    as Saturday—as it was said, however, so let it be. And I will bring
    the rest of the 'Duchess'—four or five hundred lines,—'heu, herba
    mala crescit'—(as I once saw mournfully pencilled on a white wall at
    Asolo)—but will you tell me if you quite remember the main of the
    first part—(parts there are none except in the necessary process
    of chopping up to suit the limits of a magazine—and I gave them as
    much as I could transcribe at a sudden warning)—because, if you
    please, I can bring the whole, of course.


    After seeing you, that Saturday, I was caught up by a friend and
    carried to see Vidocq—who did the honours of his museum of knives and
    nails and hooks that have helped great murderers to their purposes—he
    scarcely admits, I observe, an implement with only one attestation to
    its efficacy; but the one or two exceptions rather justify his
    latitude in their favour—thus one little sort of dessert knife did
    only take one life.... 'But then,' says Vidocq, 'it was the man's
    own mother's life, with fifty-two blows, and all for' (I think)
    'fifteen francs she had got?' So prattles good-naturedly Vidocq—one
    of his best stories of that Lacénaire—'jeune homme d'un caractère
    fort avenant—mais c'était un poète,' quoth he, turning sharp on me
    out of two or three other people round him.


    Here your letter breaks in, and sunshine too.


    Why do you send me that book—not let me take it? What trouble for
    nothing!


    An old French friend of mine, a dear foolish, very French heart and
    soul, is coming presently—his poor brains are whirling with mesmerism
    in which he believes, as in all other unbelief. He and I are to dine
    alone (I have not seen him these two years)—and I shall never be able
    to keep from driving the great wedge right through his breast and
    descending lower, from riveting his two foolish legs to the wintry
    chasm; for I that stammer and answer hap-hazard with you, get
    proportionately valiant and voluble with a mere cupful of Diderot's
    rinsings, and a man into the bargain.


    If you were prevented from leaving the house yesterday, assuredly
    to-day you will never attempt such a thing—the wind, rain—all is
    against it: I trust you will not make the first experiment except
    under really favourable auspices ... for by its success you will
    naturally be induced to go on or leave off—Still you are better! I
    fully believe, dare to believe, that will continue. As for me, since
    you ask—find me but something to do, and see if I shall not be
    well!—Though I am well now almost.


    How good you are to my roses—they are not of my making, to be sure.
    Never, by the way, did Miss Martineau work such a miracle as I now
    witness in the garden—I gathered at Rome, close to the fountain of
    Egeria, a handful of fennel-seeds from the most indisputable plant
    of fennel I ever chanced upon—and, lo, they are come up ... hemlock,
    or something akin! In two places, moreover. Wherein does hemlock
    resemble fennel? How could I mistake? No wonder that a stone's cast
    off from that Egeria's fountain is the Temple of the God Ridiculus.


    Well, on Saturday then—at three: and I will certainly bring the
    verses you mention—and trust to find you still better.


    Vivi felice—my dear friend, God bless you!

R.B.


