
Wednesday-Thursday Evening
[Post-mark, July 4, 1845.]


    Yes—I know the first part of the 'Duchess' and have it here—and for
    the rest of the poem, don't mind about being very legible, or even
    legible in the usual sense; and remember how it is my boast to be able
    to read all such manuscript writing as never is read by people who
    don't like caviare. Now you won't mind? really I rather like blots
    than otherwise—being a sort of patron-saint of all manner of
    untidyness ... if Mr. Kenyon's reproaches (of which there's a
    stereotyped edition) are justified by the fact—and he has a great
    organ of order, and knows 'disorderly persons' at a glance, I suppose.
    But you won't be particular with me in the matter of transcription?
    that is what I want to make sure of. And even if you are not
    particular, I am afraid you are not well enough to be troubled by
    writing, and writing and the thinking that comes with it—it would be
    wiser to wait till you are quite well—now wouldn't it?—and my fear
    is that the 'almost well' means 'very little better.' And why, when
    there is no motive for hurrying, run any risk? Don't think that I will
    help you to make yourself ill. That I refuse to do even so much work
    as the 'little dessert-knife' in the way of murder, ... do think! So
    upon the whole, I expect nothing on Saturday from this distance—and
    if it comes unexpectedly (I mean the Duchess and not Saturday) let
    it be at no cost, or at the least cost possible, will you? I am
    delighted in the meanwhile to hear of the quantity of 'mala herba';
    and hemlock does not come up from every seed you sow, though you call
    it by ever such bad names.


    Talking of poetry, I had a newspaper 'in help of social and political
    progress' sent to me yesterday from America—addressed to—just my
    name ... poetess, London! Think of the simplicity of those wild
    Americans in 'calculating' that 'people in general' here in England
    know what a poetess is!—Well—the post office authorities, after
    deep meditation, I do not doubt, on all probable varieties of the
    chimpanzee, and a glance to the Surrey Gardens on one side, and the
    Zoological department of Regent's Park on the other, thought of
    'Poet's Corner,' perhaps, and wrote at the top of the parcel, 'Enquire
    at Paternoster Row'! whereupon the Paternoster Row people wrote again,
    'Go to Mr. Moxon'—and I received my newspaper.


    And talking of poetesses, I had a note yesterday (again) which quite
    touched me ... from Mr. Hemans—Charles, the son of Felicia—written
    with so much feeling, that it was with difficulty I could say my
    perpetual 'no' to his wish about coming to see me. His mother's memory
    is surrounded to him, he says, 'with almost a divine lustre'—and 'as
    it cannot be to those who knew the writer alone and not the woman.' Do
    you not like to hear such things said? and is it not better than your
    tradition about Shelley's son? and is it not pleasant to know that
    that poor noble pure-hearted woman, the Vittoria Colonna of our
    country, should be so loved and comprehended by some ... by one at
    least ... of her own house? Not that, in naming Shelley, I meant for a
    moment to make a comparison—there is not equal ground for it.
    Vittoria Colonna does not walk near Dante—no. And if you promised
    never to tell Mrs. Jameson ... nor Miss Martineau ... I would confide
    to you perhaps my secret profession of faith—which is ... which is
    ... that let us say and do what we please and can ... there is a
    natural inferiority of mind in women—of the intellect ... not by any
    means, of the moral nature—and that the history of Art and of genius
    testifies to this fact openly. Oh—I would not say so to Mrs. Jameson
    for the world. I believe I was a coward to her altogether—for when
    she denounced carpet work as 'injurious to the mind,' because it led
    the workers into 'fatal habits of reverie,' I defended the carpet work
    as if I were striving pro aris et focis, (I, who am so innocent of
    all that knowledge!) and said not a word for the poor reveries which
    have frayed away so much of silken time for me ... and let her go
    away repeating again and again ... 'Oh, but you may do carpet work
    with impunity—yes! because you can be writing poems all the
    while.'!


    Think of people making poems and rugs at once. There's complex
    machinery for you!


    I told you that I had a sensation of cold blue steel from her
    eyes!—And yet I really liked and like and shall like her. She is very
    kind I believe—and it was my mistake—and I correct my impressions of
    her more and more to perfection, as you tell me who know more of her
    than I.


    Only I should not dare, ... ever, I think ... to tell her that I
    believe women ... all of us in a mass ... to have minds of quicker
    movement, but less power and depth ... and that we are under your
    feet, because we can't stand upon our own. Not that we should either
    be quite under your feet! so you are not to be too proud, if you
    please—and there is certainly some amount of wrong—: but it never
    will be righted in the manner and to the extent contemplated by
    certain of our own prophetesses ... nor ought to be, I hold in
    intimate persuasion. One woman indeed now alive ... and only that
    one down all the ages of the world—seems to me to justify for a
    moment an opposite opinion—that wonderful woman George Sand; who has
    something monstrous in combination with her genius, there is no
    denying at moments (for she has written one book, Leila, which I could
    not read, though I am not easily turned back,) but whom, in her good
    and evil together, I regard with infinitely more admiration than all
    other women of genius who are or have been. Such a colossal nature in
    every way,—with all that breadth and scope of faculty which women
    want—magnanimous, and loving the truth and loving the people—and
    with that 'hate of hate' too, which you extol—so eloquent, and yet
    earnest as if she were dumb—so full of a living sense of beauty, and
    of noble blind instincts towards an ideal purity—and so proving a
    right even in her wrong. By the way, what you say of the Vidocq museum
    reminds me of one of the chamber of masonic trial scenes in
    'Consuelo.' Could you like to see those knives?


    I began with the best intentions of writing six lines—and see what is
    written! And all because I kept my letter back ... from a doubt about
    Saturday—but it has worn away, and the appointment stands good ...
    for me: I have nothing to say against it.


    But belief in mesmerism is not the same thing as general unbelief—to
    do it justice—now is it? It may be super-belief as well. Not that
    there is not something ghastly and repelling to me in the thought of
    Dr. Elliotson's great bony fingers seeming to 'touch the stops' of a
    whole soul's harmonies—as in phreno-magnetism. And I should have
    liked far better than hearing and seeing that, to have heard you
    pour the 'cupful of Diderot's rinsings,' out,—and indeed I can fancy
    a little that you and how you could do it—and break the cup too
    afterwards!


    Another sheet—and for what?


    What is written already, if you read, you do so meritoriously—and
    it's an example of bad writing, if you want one in the poems. I am
    ashamed, you may see, of having written too much, (besides)—which is
    much worse—but one writes and writes: I do at least—for you
    are irreproachable. Ever yours my dear friend, as if I had not written
    ... or had!

E.B.B.


