
Monday Afternoon.
[Post-mark July 7, 1845.]


    While I write this,—3 o'clock you may be going out, I will hope, for
    the day is very fine, perhaps all the better for the wind: yet I got
    up this morning sure of bad weather. I shall not try to tell you how
    anxious I am for the result and to know it. You will of course feel
    fatigued at first—but persevering, as you mean to do, do you
    not?—persevering, the event must be happy.


    I thought, and still think, to write to you about George Sand, and
    the vexed question, a very Bermoothes of the 'Mental Claims of the
    Sexes Relatively Considered' (so was called the, ... I do believe, ...
    worst poem I ever read in my life), and Mrs. Hemans, and all and some
    of the points referred to in your letter—but 'by my fay, I cannot
    reason,' to-day: and, by a consequence, I feel the more—so I say how
    I want news of you ... which, when they arrive, I shall read
    'meritoriously'—do you think? My friend, what ought I to tell you on
    that head (or the reverse rather)—of your discourse? I should like to
    match you at a fancy-flight; if I could, give you nearly as pleasant
    an assurance that 'there's no merit in the case,' but the hot weather
    and lack of wit get the better of my good will—besides, I remember
    once to have admired a certain enticing simplicity in the avowal of
    the Treasurer of a Charitable Institution at a Dinner got up in its
    behalf—the Funds being at lowest, Debt at highest ... in fact, this
    Dinner was the last chance of the Charity, and this Treasurer's speech
    the main feature in the chance—and our friend, inspired by the
    emergency, went so far as to say, with a bland smile—'Do not let it
    be supposed that we—despise annual contributors,—we
    rather—solicit their assistance.' All which means, do not think
    that I take any 'merit' for making myself supremely happy, I rather
    &c. &c.


    Always rather mean to deserve it a little better—but never shall: so
    it should be, for you and me—and as it was in the beginning so it is
    still. You are the—But you know and why should I tease myself with
    words?


    Let me send this off now—and to-morrow some more, because I trust to
    hear you have made the first effort and with success.

Ever yours, my dear friend,
R.B.


