
Monday.
[Post-mark, July 8, 1845.]


    Well—I have really been out; and am really alive after it—which is
    more surprising still—alive enough I mean, to write even so,
    to-night. But perhaps I say so with more emphasis, to console myself
    for failing in my great ambition of getting into the Park and of
    reaching Mr. Kenyon's door just to leave a card there vaingloriously,
    ... all which I did fail in, and was forced to turn back from the
    gates of Devonshire Place. The next time it will be better
    perhaps—and this time there was no fainting nor anything very wrong
    ... not even cowardice on the part of the victim (be it recorded!) for
    one of my sisters was as usual in authority and ordered the turning
    back just according to her own prudence and not my selfwill. Only you
    will not, any of you, ask me to admit that it was all
    delightful—pleasanter work than what you wanted to spare me in taking
    care of your roses on Saturday! don't ask that, and I will try it
    again presently.


    I ought to be ashamed of writing this I and me-ism—but since your
    kindness made it worth while asking about I must not be over-wise and
    silent on my side.


    Tuesday.—Was it fair to tell me to write though, and be silent of
    the 'Duchess,' and when I was sure to be so delighted—and you knew
    it? I think not indeed. And, to make the obedience possible, I go
    on fast to say that I heard from Mr. Horne a few days since and that
    he said—'your envelope reminds me of'—you, he said ... and so,
    asked if you were in England still, and meant to write to you. To
    which I have answered that I believe you to be in England—thinking it
    strange about the envelope; which, as far as I remember, was one of
    those long ones, used, the more conveniently to enclose to him back
    again a MS. of his own I had offered with another of his, by his
    desire, to Colburn's Magazine, as the productions of a friend of
    mine, when he was in Germany and afraid of his proper fatal
    onymousness, yet in difficulty how to approach the magazines as a
    nameless writer (you will not mention this of course). And when he was
    in Germany, I remember, ... writing just as your first letter came ...
    that I mentioned it to him, and was a little frankly proud of it! but
    since, your name has not occurred once—not once, certainly!—and it
    is strange.... Only he can't have heard of your having been here,
    and it must have been a chance-remark—altogether! taking an
    imaginary emphasis from my evil conscience perhaps. Talking of evils,
    how wrong of you to make that book for me! and how ill I thanked you
    after all! Also, I couldn't help feeling more grateful still for the
    Duchess ... who is under ban: and for how long I wonder?

My dear friend, I am ever yours,
E.B.B.


