
Wednesday Morning.
[Post-mark, July 9, 1845.]


    You are all that is good and kind: I am happy and thankful the
    beginning (and worst of it) is over and so well. The Park and Mr.
    Kenyon's all in good time—and your sister was most prudent—and you
    mean to try again: God bless you, all to be said or done—but, as I
    say it, no vain word. No doubt it was a mere chance-thought, and à
    propos de bottes of Horne—neither he or any other can know or even
    fancy how it is. Indeed, though on other grounds I should be all so
    proud of being known for your friend by everybody, yet there's no
    denying the deep delight of playing the Eastern Jew's part here in
    this London—they go about, you know by travel-books, with the tokens
    of extreme destitution and misery, and steal by blind ways and
    by-paths to some blank dreary house, one obscure door in it—which
    being well shut behind them, they grope on through a dark corridor or
    so, and then, a blaze follows the lifting a curtain or the like, for
    they are in a palace-hall with fountains and light, and marble and
    gold, of which the envious are never to dream! And I, too, love to
    have few friends, and to live alone, and to see you from week to week.
    Do you not suppose I am grateful?


    And you do like the 'Duchess,' as much as you have got of it? that
    delights me, too—for every reason. But I fear I shall not be able to
    bring you the rest to-morrow—Thursday, my day—because I have been
    broken in upon more than one morning; nor, though much better in my
    head, can I do anything at night just now. All will come right
    eventually, I hope, and I shall transcribe the other things you are to
    judge.


    To-morrow then—only (and that is why I would write) do, do know me
    for what I am and treat me as I deserve in that one respect, and go
    out, without a moment's thought or care, if to-morrow should suit
    you—leave word to that effect and I shall be as glad as if I saw you
    or more—reasoned gladness, you know. Or you can write—though that
    is not necessary at all,—do think of all this!

I am yours ever, dear friend,
R.B.


