
[Post-mark, July 12, 1845.]


    You understand that it was not a resolution passed in favour of
    formality, when I said what I did yesterday about not going out at the
    time you were coming—surely you do; whatever you might signify to a
    different effect. If it were necessary for me to go out every day, or
    most days even, it would be otherwise; but as it is, I may certainly
    keep the day you come, free from the fear of carriages, let the sun
    shine its best or worst, without doing despite to you or injury to
    me—and that's all I meant to insist upon indeed and indeed. You see,
    Jupiter Tonans was good enough to come to-day on purpose to deliver
    me—one evil for another! for I confess with shame and contrition,
    that I never wait to enquire whether it thunders to the left or the
    right, to be frightened most ingloriously. Isn't it a disgrace to
    anyone with a pretension to poetry? Dr. Chambers, a part of whose
    office it is, Papa says, 'to reconcile foolish women to their
    follies,' used to take the side of my vanity, and discourse at length
    on the passive obedience of some nervous systems to electrical
    influences; but perhaps my faint-heartedness is besides traceable to a
    half-reasonable terror of a great storm in Herefordshire, where great
    storms most do congregate, (such storms!) round the Malvern Hills,
    those mountains of England. We lived four miles from their roots,
    through all my childhood and early youth, in a Turkish house my father
    built himself, crowded with minarets and domes, and crowned with metal
    spires and crescents, to the provocation (as people used to observe)
    of every lightning of heaven. Once a storm of storms happened, and we
    all thought the house was struck—and a tree was so really, within two
    hundred yards of the windows while I looked out—the bark, rent from
    the top to the bottom ... torn into long ribbons by the dreadful fiery
    hands, and dashed out into the air, over the heads of other trees, or
    left twisted in their branches—torn into shreds in a moment, as a
    flower might be, by a child! Did you ever see a tree after it has been
    struck by lightning? The whole trunk of that tree was bare and
    peeled—and up that new whiteness of it, ran the finger-mark of the
    lightning in a bright beautiful rose-colour (none of your roses
    brighter or more beautiful!) the fever-sign of the certain
    death—though the branches themselves were for the most part
    untouched, and spread from the peeled trunk in their full summer
    foliage; and birds singing in them three hours afterwards! And, in
    that same storm, two young women belonging to a festive party were
    killed on the Malvern Hills—each sealed to death in a moment with a
    sign on the chest which a common seal would cover—only the sign on
    them was not rose-coloured as on our tree, but black as charred wood.
    So I get 'possessed' sometimes with the effects of these impressions,
    and so does one, at least, of my sisters, in a lower degree—and
    oh!—how amusing and instructive all this is to you! When my father
    came into the room to-day and found me hiding my eyes from the
    lightning, he was quite angry and called 'it disgraceful to anybody
    who had ever learnt the alphabet'—to which I answered humbly that 'I
    knew it was'—but if I had been impertinent, I might have added that
    wisdom does not come by the alphabet but in spite of it? Don't you
    think so in a measure? non obstantibus Bradbury and Evans? There's a
    profane question—and ungrateful too ... after the Duchess—I except
    the Duchess and her peers—and be sure she will be the world's Duchess
    and received as one of your most striking poems. Full of various power
    the poem is.... I cannot say how deeply it has impressed me—but
    though I want the conclusion, I don't wish for it; and in this, am
    reasonable for once! You will not write and make yourself ill—will
    you? or read 'Sybil' at unlawful hours even? Are you better at all?
    What a letter! and how very foolishly to-day

I am yours,  

E.B.B.


