
Sunday Morning.
[Post-mark, July 14, 1845.]


    Very well—I shall say no more on the subject—though it was not any
    piece of formality on your part that I deprecated; nor even your
    over-kindness exactly—I rather wanted you to be really, wisely kind,
    and do me a greater favour then the next great one in degree; but you
    must understand this much in me, how you can lay me under deepest
    obligation. I daresay you think you have some, perhaps many, to whom
    your well-being is of deeper interest than to me. Well, if that be
    so, do for their sakes make every effort with the remotest chance of
    proving serviceable to you; nor set yourself against any little
    irksomeness these carriage-drives may bring with them just at the
    beginning; and you may say, if you like, 'how I shall delight those
    friends, if I can make this newest one grateful'—and, as from the
    known quantity one reasons out the unknown, this newest friend will be
    one glow of gratitude, he knows that, if you can warm your finger-tips
    and so do yourself that much real good, by setting light to a dozen
    'Duchesses': why ought I not to say this when it is so true? Besides,
    people profess as much to their merest friends—for I have been
    looking through a poem-book just now, and was told, under the head of
    Album-verses alone, that for A. the writer would die, and for B. die
    too but a crueller death, and for C. too, and D. and so on. I wonder
    whether they have since wanted to borrow money of him on the strength
    of his professions. But you must remember we are in July; the 13th it
    is, and summer will go and cold weather stay ('come' forsooth!)—and
    now is the time of times. Still I feared the rain would hinder you on
    Friday—but the thunder did not frighten me—for you: your father must
    pardon me for holding most firmly with Dr. Chambers—his theory is
    quite borne out by my own experience, for I have seen a man it were
    foolish to call a coward, a great fellow too, all but die away in a
    thunderstorm, though he had quite science enough to explain why there
    was no immediate danger at all—whereupon his younger brother
    suggested that he should just go out and treat us to a repetition of
    Franklin's experiment with the cloud and the kite—a well-timed
    proposition which sent the Explainer down with a white face into the
    cellar. What a grand sight your tree was—is, for I see it. My
    father has a print of a tree so struck—torn to ribbons, as you
    describe—but the rose-mark is striking and new to me. We had a good
    storm on our last voyage, but I went to bed at the end, as I
    thought—and only found there had been lightning next day by the bare
    poles under which we were riding: but the finest mountain fit of the
    kind I ever saw has an unfortunately ludicrous association. It was at
    Possagno, among the Euganean Hills, and I was at a poor house in the
    town—an old woman was before a little picture of the Virgin, and at
    every fresh clap she lighted, with the oddest sputtering muttering
    mouthful of prayer imaginable, an inch of guttery candle, which, the
    instant the last echo had rolled away, she as constantly blew out
    again for saving's sake—having, of course, to light the smoke of
    it, about an instant after that: the expenditure in wax at which the
    elements might be propitiated, you see, was a matter for curious
    calculation. I suppose I ought to have bought the whole taper for some
    four or five centesimi (100 of which make 8d. English) and so kept the
    countryside safe for about a century of bad weather. Leigh Hunt tells
    you a story he had from Byron, of kindred philosophy in a Jew who was
    surprised by a thunderstorm while he was dining on bacon—he tried to
    eat between-whiles, but the flashes were as pertinacious as he, so at
    last he pushed his plate away, just remarking with a compassionate
    shrug, 'all this fuss about a piece of pork!' By the way, what a
    characteristic of an Italian late evening is Summer-lightning—it
    hangs in broad slow sheets, dropping from cloud to cloud, so long in
    dropping and dying off. The 'bora,' which you only get at Trieste,
    brings wonderful lightning—you are in glorious June-weather, fancy,
    of an evening, under green shock-headed acacias, so thick and green,
    with the cicalas stunning you above, and all about you men, women,
    rich and poor, sitting standing and coming and going—and through all
    the laughter and screaming and singing, the loud clink of the spoons
    against the glasses, the way of calling for fresh 'sorbetti'—for all
    the world is at open-coffee-house at such an hour—when suddenly there
    is a stop in the sunshine, a blackness drops down, then a great white
    column of dust drives straight on like a wedge, and you see the acacia
    heads snap off, now one, then another—and all the people scream 'la
    bora, la bora!' and you are caught up in their whirl and landed in
    some interior, the man with the guitar on one side of you, and the boy
    with a cageful of little brown owls for sale, on the other—meanwhile,
    the thunder claps, claps, with such a persistence, and the rain, for a
    finale, falls in a mass, as if you had knocked out the whole bottom of
    a huge tank at once—then there is a second stop—out comes the
    sun—somebody clinks at his glass, all the world bursts out laughing,
    and prepares to pour out again,—but you, the stranger, do make
    the best of your way out, with no preparation at all; whereupon you
    infallibly put your foot (and half your leg) into a river, really
    that, of rainwater—that's a Bora (and that comment of yours, a
    justifiable pun!) Such things you get in Italy, but better, better,
    the best of all things you do not (I do not) get those. And I shall
    see you on Wednesday, please remember, and bring you the rest of the
    poem—that you should like it, gratifies me more than I will try to
    say, but then, do not you be tempted by that pleasure of pleasing
    which I think is your besetting sin—may it not be?—and so cut me off
    from the other pleasure of being profited. As I told you, I like so
    much to fancy that you see, and will see, what I do as I see it,
    while it is doing, as nobody else in the world should, certainly, even
    if they thought it worth while to want—but when I try and build a
    great building I shall want you to come with me and judge it and
    counsel me before the scaffolding is taken down, and while you have to
    make your way over hods and mortar and heaps of lime, and trembling
    tubs of size, and those thin broad whitewashing brushes I always had a
    desire to take up and bespatter with. And now goodbye—I am to see you
    on Wednesday I trust—and to hear you say you are better, still
    better, much better? God grant that, and all else good for you, dear
    friend, and so for R.B.

ever yours.


