
[Post-mark, July 18, 1845.]


    I suppose nobody is ever expected to acknowledge his or her 'besetting
    sin'—it would be unnatural—and therefore you will not be surprised
    to hear me deny the one imputed to me for mine. I deny it quite and
    directly. And if my denial goes for nothing, which is but reasonable,
    I might call in a great cloud of witnesses, ... a thundercloud, ...
    (talking of storms!) and even seek no further than this table for a
    first witness; this letter, I had yesterday, which calls me ... let me
    see how many hard names ... 'unbending,' ... 'disdainful,' ... 'cold
    hearted,' ... 'arrogant,' ... yes, 'arrogant, as women always are when
    men grow humble' ... there's a charge against all possible and
    probable petticoats beyond mine and through it! Not that either they
    or mine deserve the charge—we do not; to the lowest hem of us! for I
    don't pass to the other extreme, mind, and adopt besetting sins 'over
    the way' and in antithesis. It's an undeserved charge, and unprovoked!
    and in fact, the very flower of self-love self-tormented into ill
    temper; and shall remain unanswered, for me, ... and should, ...
    even if I could write mortal epigrams, as your Lamia speaks them. Only
    it serves to help my assertion that people in general who know
    something of me, my dear friend, are not inclined to agree with you in
    particular, about my having an 'over-pleasure in pleasing,' for a
    besetting sin. If you had spoken of my sister Henrietta indeed, you
    would have been right—so right! but for me, alas, my sins are not
    half as amiable, nor given to lean to virtue's side with half such a
    grace. And then I have a pretension to speak the truth like a Roman,
    even in matters of literature, where Mr. Kenyon says falseness is a
    fashion—and really and honestly I should not be afraid ... I should
    have no reason to be afraid, ... if all the notes and letters written
    by my hand for years and years about presentation copies of poems and
    other sorts of books were brought together and 'conferred,' as they
    say of manuscripts, before my face—I should not shrink and be
    ashamed. Not that I always tell the truth as I see it—but I never
    do speak falsely with intention and consciousness—never—and I do
    not find that people of letters are sooner offended than others are,
    by the truth told in gentleness;—I do not remember to have offended
    anyone in this relation, and by these means. Well!—but from me to
    you; it is all different, you know—you must know how different it
    is. I can tell you truly what I think of this thing and of that thing
    in your 'Duchess'—but I must of a necessity hesitate and fall into
    misgiving of the adequacy of my truth, so called. To judge at all of a
    work of yours, I must look up to it, and far up—because whatever
    faculty I have is included in your faculty, and with a great rim all
    round it besides! And thus, it is not at all from an over-pleasure in
    pleasing you, not at all from an inclination to depreciate myself,
    that I speak and feel as I do and must on some occasions; it is simply
    the consequence of a true comprehension of you and of me—and apart
    from it, I should not be abler, I think, but less able, to assist you
    in anything. I do wish you would consider all this reasonably, and
    understand it as a third person would in a moment, and consent not to
    spoil the real pleasure I have and am about to have in your poetry, by
    nailing me up into a false position with your gold-headed nails of
    chivalry, which won't hold to the wall through this summer. Now you
    will not answer this?—you will only understand it and me—and that I
    am not servile but sincere, but earnest, but meaning what I say—and
    when I say I am afraid, you will believe that I am afraid; and when I
    say I have misgivings, you will believe that I have misgivings—you
    will trust me so far, and give me liberty to breathe and feel
    naturally ... according to my own nature. Probably, or certainly
    rather, I have one advantage over you, ... one, of which women are not
    fond of boasting—that of being older by years—for the 'Essay on
    Mind,' which was the first poem published by me (and rather more
    printed than published after all), the work of my earliest youth, half
    childhood, half womanhood, was published in 1826 I see. And if I told
    Mr. Kenyon not to let you see that book, it was not for the date, but
    because Coleridge's daughter was right in calling it a mere 'girl's
    exercise'; because it is just that and no more, ... no expression
    whatever of my nature as it ever was, ... pedantic, and in some things
    pert, ... and such as altogether, and to do myself justice (which I
    would fain do of course), I was not in my whole life. Bad books are
    never like their writers, you know—and those under-age books are
    generally bad. Also I have found it hard work to get into
    expression, though I began rhyming from my very infancy, much as you
    did (and this, with no sympathy near to me—I have had to do without
    sympathy in the full sense—), and even in my 'Seraphim' days, my
    tongue clove to the roof of my mouth,—from leading so conventual
    recluse a life, perhaps—and all my better poems were written last
    year, the very best thing to come, if there should be any life or
    courage to come; I scarcely know. Sometimes—it is the real truth—I
    have haste to be done with it all. It is the real truth; however to
    say so may be an ungrateful return for your kind and generous words,
    ... which I do feel gratefully, let me otherwise feel as I will, ...
    or must. But then you know you are liable to such prodigious mistakes
    about besetting sins and even besetting virtues—to such a set of
    small delusions, that are sure to break one by one, like other
    bubbles, as you draw in your breath, ... as I see by the law of my own
    star, my own particular star, the star I was born under, the star
    Wormwood, ... on the opposite side of the heavens from the
    constellations of 'the Lyre and the Crown.' In the meantime, it is
    difficult to thank you, or not to thank you, for all your
    kindnesses—αλγος δε σιγαν. Only Mrs. Jameson told me of Lady
    Byron's saying 'that she knows she is burnt every day in effigy by
    half the world, but that the effigy is so unlike herself as to be
    inoffensive to her,' and just so, or rather just in the converse of
    so, is it with me and your kindnesses. They are meant for quite
    another than I, and are too far to be so near. The comfort is ... in
    seeing you throw all those ducats out of the window, (and how many
    ducats go in a figure to a 'dozen Duchesses,' it is profane to
    calculate) the comfort is that you will not be the poorer for it in
    the end; since the people beneath, are honest enough to push them back
    under the door. Rather a bleak comfort and occupation though!—and you
    may find better work for your friends, who are (some of them) weary
    even unto death of the uses of this life. And now, you who are
    generous, be generous, and take no notice of all this. I speak of
    myself, not of you so there is nothing for you to contradict or
    discuss—and if there were, you would be really kind and give me my
    way in it. Also you may take courage; for I promise not to vex you by
    thanking you against your will,—more than may be helped.


    Some of this letter was written before yesterday and in reply of
    course to yours—so it is to pass for two letters, being long enough
    for just six. Yesterday you must have wondered at me for being in such
    a maze altogether about the poems—and so now I rise to explain that
    it was assuredly the wine song and no other which I read of yours in
    Hood's. And then, what did I say of the Dante and Beatrice? Because
    what I referred to was the exquisite page or two or three on that
    subject in the 'Pentameron.' I do not remember anything else of
    Landor's with the same bearing—do you? As to Montaigne, with the
    threads of my thoughts smoothly disentangled, I can see nothing
    coloured by him ... nothing. Do bring all the Hood poems of your
    own—inclusive of the 'Tokay,' because I read it in such haste as to
    whirl up all the dust you saw, from the wheels of my chariot. The
    'Duchess' is past speaking of here—but you will see how I am
    delighted. And we must make speed—only taking care of your head—for
    I heard to-day that Papa and my aunt are discussing the question of
    sending me off either to Alexandria or Malta for the winter. Oh—it
    is quite a passing talk and thought, I dare say! and it would not be
    in any case, until September or October; though in every case, I
    suppose, I should not be much consulted ... and all cases and places
    would seem better to me (if I were) than Madeira which the physicians
    used to threaten me with long ago. So take care of your headache and
    let us have the 'Bells' rung out clear before the summer ends ... and
    pray don't say again anything about clear consciences or unclear ones,
    in granting me the privilege of reading your manuscripts—which is all
    clear privilege to me, with pride and gladness waiting on it. May God
    bless you always my dear friend!

E.B.B.


    You left behind your sister's little basket—but I hope you did not
    forget to thank her for my carnations.


