
[no date]


    I shall just say, at the beginning of a note as at the end, I am yours
    ever, and not till summer ends and my nails fall out, and my breath
    breaks bubbles,—ought you to write thus having restricted me as you
    once did, and do still? You tie me like a Shrove-Tuesday fowl to a
    stake and then pick the thickest cudgel out of your lot, and at my
    head it goes—I wonder whether you remembered having predicted exactly
    the same horror once before. 'I was to see you—and you were to
    understand'—Do you? do you understand—my own friend—with that
    superiority in years, too! For I confess to that—you need not throw
    that in my teeth ... as soon as I read your 'Essay on Mind'—(which of
    course I managed to do about 12 hours after Mr. K's positive refusal
    to keep his promise, and give me the book) from preface to the 'Vision
    of Fame' at the end, and reflected on my own doings about that time,
    1826—I did indeed see, and wonder at, your advance over me in
    years—what then? I have got nearer you considerably—(if only
    nearer)—since then—and prove it by the remarks I make at favourable
    times—such as this, for instance, which occurs in a poem you are to
    see—written some time ago—which advises nobody who thinks nobly of
    the Soul, to give, if he or she can help, such a good argument to the
    materialist as the owning that any great choice of that Soul, which it
    is born to make and which—(in its determining, as it must, the whole
    future course and impulses of that soul)—which must endure for ever,
    even though the object that induced the choice should
    disappear—owning, I say, that such a choice may be scientifically
    determined and produced, at any operator's pleasure, by a definite
    number of ingredients, so much youth, so much beauty, so much talent
    &c. &c., with the same certainty and precision that another kind of
    operator will construct you an artificial volcano with so much steel
    filings and flower of sulphur and what not. There is more in the soul
    than rises to the surface and meets the eye; whatever does that, is
    for this world's immediate uses; and were this world all, all in us
    would be producible and available for use, as it is with the body
    now—but with the soul, what is to be developed afterward is the
    main thing, and instinctively asserts its rights—so that when you
    hate (or love) you shall not be so able to explain 'why' ('You' is the
    ordinary creature enough of my poem—he might not be so able.)


    There, I will write no more. You will never drop me off the golden
    hooks, I dare believe—and the rest is with God—whose finger I see
    every minute of my life. Alexandria! Well, and may I not as easily ask
    leave to come 'to-morrow at the Muezzin' as next Wednesday at three?


    God bless you—do not be otherwise than kind to this letter which it
    costs me pains, great pains to avoid writing better, as
    truthfuller—this you get is not the first begun. Come, you shall not
    have the heart to blame me; for, see, I will send all my sins of
    commission with Hood,—blame them, tell me about them, and
    meantime let me be, dear friend, yours,

R.B.


