
Monday.
[Post-mark, July 21, 1845.]


    But I never did strike you or touch you—and you are not in earnest
    in the complaint you make—and this is really all I am going to say
    to-day. What I said before was wrung from me by words on your part,
    while you know far too well how to speak so as to make them go
    deepest, and which sometimes it becomes impossible, or over-hard to
    bear without deprecation:—as when, for instance, you talk of being
    'grateful' to me!!—Well! I will try that there shall be no more of
    it—no more provocation of generosities—and so, (this once) as you
    express it, I 'will not have the heart to blame' you—except for
    reading my books against my will, which was very wrong indeed. Mr.
    Kenyon asked me, I remember, (he had a mania of sending my copybook
    literature round the world to this person and that person, and I was
    roused at last into binding him by a vow to do so no more) I remember
    he asked me ... 'Is Mr. Browning to be excepted?'; to which I answered
    that nobody was to be excepted—and thus he was quite right in
    resisting to the death ... or to dinner-time ... just as you were
    quite wrong after dinner. Now, could a woman have been more curious?
    Could the very author of the book have done worse? But I leave my sins
    and yours gladly, to get into the Hood poems which have delighted me
    so—and first to the St. Praxed's which is of course the finest and
    most powerful ... and indeed full of the power of life ... and of
    death. It has impressed me very much. Then the 'Angel and Child,' with
    all its beauty and significance!—and the 'Garden Fancies' ... some of
    the stanzas about the name of the flower, with such exquisite music in
    them, and grace of every kind—and with that beautiful and musical use
    of the word 'meandering,' which I never remember having seen used in
    relation to sound before. It does to mate with your 'simmering
    quiet' in Sordello, which brings the summer air into the room as sure
    as you read it. Then I like your burial of the pedant so much!—you
    have quite the damp smell of funguses and the sense of creeping things
    through and through it. And the 'Laboratory' is hideous as you meant
    to make it:—only I object a little to your tendency ... which is
    almost a habit, and is very observable in this poem I think, ... of
    making lines difficult for the reader to read ... see the opening
    lines of this poem. Not that music is required everywhere, nor in
    them certainly, but that the uncertainty of rhythm throws the
    reader's mind off the rail ... and interrupts his progress with you
    and your influence with him. Where we have not direct pleasure from
    rhythm, and where no peculiar impression is to be produced by the
    changes in it, we should be encouraged by the poet to forget it
    altogether; should we not? I am quite wrong perhaps—but you see how
    I do not conceal my wrongnesses where they mix themselves up with my
    sincere impressions. And how could it be that no one within my hearing
    ever spoke of these poems? Because it is true that I never saw one of
    them—never!—except the 'Tokay,' which is inferior to all; and that I
    was quite unaware of your having printed so much with Hood—or at all,
    except this 'Tokay,' and this 'Duchess'! The world is very deaf and
    dumb, I think—but in the end, we need not be afraid of its not
    learning its lesson.


    Could you come—for I am going out in the carriage, and will not stay
    to write of your poems even, any more to-day—could you come on
    Thursday or Friday (the day left to your choice) instead of on
    Wednesday? If I could help it I would not say so—it is not a caprice.
    And I leave it to you, whether Thursday or Friday. And Alexandria
    seems discredited just now for Malta—and 'anything but Madeira,' I go
    on saying to myself. These Hood poems are all to be in the next
    'Bells' of course—of necessity?


    May God bless you my dear friend, my ever dear friend!—

E.B.B.


