
[Post-mark, July 25, 1845.]


    Are you any better to-day? and will you say just the truth of it? and
    not attempt to do any of the writing which does harm—nor of the
    reading even, which may do harm—and something does harm to you, you
    see—and you told me not long ago that you knew how to avoid the harm
    ... now, did you not? and what could it have been last week which you
    did not avoid, and which made you so unwell? Beseech you not to think
    that I am going to aid and abet in this wronging of yourself, for I
    will not indeed—and I am only sorry to have given you my querulous
    queries yesterday ... and to have omitted to say in relation to them,
    too, how they were to be accepted in any case as just passing thoughts
    of mine for your passing thoughts, ... some right, it may be ...
    some wrong, it must be ... and none, insisted on even by the thinker!
    just impressions, and by no means pretending to be judgments—now
    will you understand? Also, I intended (as a proof of my fallacy) to
    strike out one or two of my doubts before I gave the paper to you—so
    whichever strikes you as the most foolish of them, of course must be
    what I meant to strike out—(there's ingenuity for you!). The poem
    did, for the rest, as will be suggested to you, give me the very
    greatest pleasure, and astonish me in two ways ... by the
    versification, mechanically considered; and by the successful
    evolution of pure beauty from all that roughness and rudeness of the
    sin of the boar-pinner—successfully evolved, without softening one
    hoarse accent of his voice. But there is to be a pause now—you will
    not write any more—no, nor come here on Wednesday, if coming into the
    roar of this London should make the pain worse, as I cannot help
    thinking it must—and you were not well yesterday morning, you
    admitted. You will take care? And if there should be a wisdom in
    going away...!


    Was it very wrong of me, doing what I told you of yesterday? Very
    imprudent, I am afraid—but I never knew how to be prudent—and then,
    there is not a sharing of responsibility in any sort of imaginable
    measure; but a mere going away of so many thoughts, apart from the
    thinker, or of words, apart from the speaker, ... just as I might give
    away a pocket-handkerchief to be newly marked and mine no longer. I
    did not do—and would not have done, ... one of those papers singly.
    It would have been unbecoming of me in every way. It was simply a
    writing of notes ... of slips of paper ... now on one subject, and now
    on another ... which were thrown into the great cauldron and boiled up
    with other matter, and re-translated from my idiom where there seemed
    a need for it. And I am not much afraid of being ever guessed
    at—except by those Oedipuses who astounded me once for a moment and
    were after all, I hope, baffled by the Sphinx—or ever betrayed;
    because besides the black Stygian oaths and indubitable honour of the
    editor, he has some interest, even as I have the greatest, in being
    silent and secret. And nothing is mine ... if something is of me
    ... or from me, rather. Yet it was wrong and foolish, I see
    plainly—wrong in all but the motives. How dreadful to write against
    time, and with a side-ways running conscience! And then the literature
    of the day was wider than his knowledge, all round! And the
    booksellers were barking distraction on every side!—I had some of the
    mottos to find too! But the paper relating to you I never was
    consulted about—or in one particular way it would have been
    better,—as easily it might have been. May God bless you, my dear
    friend,

E.B.B.


