
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, July 25, 1845.]


    You would let me now, I dare say, call myself grateful to you—yet
    such is my jealousy in these matters—so do I hate the material when
    it puts down, (or tries) the immaterial in the offices of friendship;
    that I could almost tell you I was not grateful, and try if that way
    I could make you see the substantiality of those other favours you
    refuse to recognise, and reality of the other gratitude you will not
    admit. But truth is truth, and you are all generosity, and will draw
    none but the fair inference, so I thank you as well as I can for this
    also—this last kindness. And you know its value, too—how if there
    were another you in the world, who had done all you have done and
    whom I merely admired for that; if such an one had sent me such a
    criticism, so exactly what I want and can use and turn to good; you
    know how I would have told you, my you I saw yesterday, all about
    it, and been sure of your sympathy and gladness:—but the two in one!


    For the criticism itself, it is all true, except the over-eating—all
    the suggestions are to be adopted, the improvements accepted. I so
    thoroughly understand your spirit in this, that, just in this
    beginning, I should really like to have found some point in which I
    could coöperate with your intention, and help my work by disputing the
    effect of any alteration proposed, if it ought to be disputed—that
    would answer your purpose exactly as well as agreeing with you,—so
    that the benefit to me were apparent; but this time I cannot dispute
    one point. All is for best.


    So much for this 'Duchess'—which I shall ever rejoice in—wherever
    was a bud, even, in that strip of May-bloom, a live musical bee hangs
    now. I shall let it lie (my poem), till just before I print it; and
    then go over it, alter at the places, and do something for the places
    where I (really) wrote anyhow, almost, to get done. It is an odd fact,
    yet characteristic of my accomplishings one and all in this kind, that
    of the poem, the real conception of an evening (two years ago,
    fully)—of that, not a line is written,—though perhaps after all,
    what I am going to call the accessories in the story are real though
    indirect reflexes of the original idea, and so supersede properly
    enough the necessity of its personal appearance, so to speak. But, as
    I conceived the poem, it consisted entirely of the Gipsy's description
    of the life the Lady was to lead with her future Gipsy lover—a real
    life, not an unreal one like that with the Duke. And as I meant to
    write it, all their wild adventures would have come out and the
    insignificance of the former vegetation have been deducible only—as
    the main subject has become now; of course it comes to the same thing,
    for one would never show half by half like a cut orange.—


    Will you write to me? caring, though, so much for my best interests as
    not to write if you can work for yourself, or save yourself fatigue. I
    think before writing—or just after writing—such a sentence—but
    reflection only justifies my first feeling; I would rather go
    without your letters, without seeing you at all, if that advantaged
    you—my dear, first and last friend; my friend! And now—surely I
    might dare say you may if you please get well through God's
    goodness—with persevering patience, surely—and this next winter
    abroad—which you must get ready for now, every sunny day, will you
    not? If I venture to weary you again with all this, is there not the
    cause of causes, and did not the prophet write that 'there was a tide
    in the affairs of men, which taken at the E.B.B.' led on to the
    fortune of

Your R.B.


    Oh, let me tell you in the bitterness of my heart, that it was only 4
    o'clock—that clock I enquired about—and that, ... no, I shall never
    say with any grace what I want to say ... and now dare not ... that
    you all but owe me an extra quarter of an hour next time: as in the
    East you give a beggar something for a few days running—then you miss
    him; and next day he looks indignant when the regular dole falls and
    murmurs—'And, for yesterday?'—Do I stay too long, I want to
    know,—too long for the voice and head and all but the spirit that may
    not so soon tire,—knowing the good it does. If you would but tell me.


    God bless you—


