
Saturday.
[Post-mark, July 28, 1845]


    You say too much indeed in this letter which has crossed mine—and
    particularly as there is not a word in it of what I most wanted to
    know and want to know ... how you are—for you must observe, if you
    please, that the very paper you pour such kindness on, was written
    after your own example and pattern, when, in the matter of my
    'Prometheus' (such different wearying matter!), you took trouble for
    me and did me good. Judge from this, if even in inferior things, there
    can be gratitude from you to me!—or rather, do not judge—but listen
    when I say that I am delighted to have met your wishes in writing as I
    wrote; only that you are surely wrong in refusing to see a single
    wrongness in all that heap of weedy thoughts, and that when you look
    again, you must come to the admission of it. One of the thistles is
    the suggestion about the line

Was it singing, was it saying,


    which you wrote so, and which I proposed to amend by an intermediate
    'or.' Thinking of it at a distance, it grows clear to me that you were
    right, and that there should be and must be no 'or' to disturb the
    listening pause. Now should there? And there was something else,
    which I forget at this moment—and something more than the something
    else. Your account of the production of the poem interests me very
    much—and proves just what I wanted to make out from your statements
    the other day, and they refused, I thought, to let me, ... that you
    are more faithful to your first Idea than to your first plan. Is
    it so? or not? 'Orange' is orange—but which half of the orange is
    not predestinated from all eternity—: is it so?


    Sunday.—I wrote so much yesterday and then went out, not knowing
    very well how to speak or how to be silent (is it better to-day?) of
    some expressions of yours ... and of your interest in me—which are
    deeply affecting to my feelings—whatever else remains to be said of
    them. And you know that you make great mistakes, ... of fennel for
    hemlock, of four o'clocks for five o'clocks, and of other things of
    more consequence, one for another; and may not be quite right besides
    as to my getting well 'if I please!' ... which reminds me a little
    of what Papa says sometimes when he comes into this room unexpectedly
    and convicts me of having dry toast for dinner, and declares angrily
    that obstinacy and dry toast have brought me to my present condition,
    and that if I pleased to have porter and beefsteaks instead, I
    should be as well as ever I was, in a month!... But where is the need
    of talking of it? What I wished to say was this—that if I get better
    or worse ... as long as I live and to the last moment of life, I shall
    remember with an emotion which cannot change its character, all the
    generous interest and feeling you have spent on me—wasted on me I
    was going to write—but I would not provoke any answering—and in one
    obvious sense, it need not be so. I never shall forget these things,
    my dearest friend; nor remember them more coldly. God's goodness!—I
    believe in it, as in His sunshine here—which makes my head ache a
    little, while it comes in at the window, and makes most other people
    gayer—it does me good too in a different way. And so, may God bless
    you! and me in this ... just this, ... that I may never have the
    sense, ... intolerable in the remotest apprehension of it ... of
    being, in any way, directly or indirectly, the means of ruffling your
    smooth path by so much as one of my flint-stones!—In the meantime you
    do not tire me indeed even when you go later for sooner ... and I do
    not tire myself even when I write longer and duller letters to you (if
    the last is possible) than the one I am ending now ... as the most
    grateful (leave me that word) of your friends.

E.B.B.


    How could you think that I should speak to Mr. Kenyon of the book? All
    I ever said to him has been that you had looked through my
    'Prometheus' for me—and that I was not disappointed in you, these
    two things on two occasions. I do trust that your head is better.


