
Thursday.
[Post-mark, August 2, 1845.]


    Let me write one word ... not to have it off my mind ... because it is
    by no means heavily on it; but lest I should forget to write it at
    all by not writing it at once. What could you mean, ... I have been
    thinking since you went away ... by applying such a grave expression
    as having a thing 'off your mind' to that foolish subject of the
    stupid book (mine), and by making it worth your while to account
    logically for your wish about my not mentioning it to Mr. Kenyon? You
    could not fancy for one moment that I was vexed in the matter of the
    book? or in the other matter of your wish? Now just hear me. I
    explained to you that I had been silent to Mr. Kenyon, first because
    the fact was so; and next and a little, because I wanted to show how I
    anticipated your wish by a wish of my own ... though from a different
    motive. Your motive I really did take to be (never suspecting my
    dear kind cousin of treason) to be a natural reluctancy of being
    convicted (forgive me!) of such an arch-womanly curiosity. For my own
    motive ... motives ... they are more than one ... you must trust me;
    and refrain as far as you can from accusing me of an over-love of
    Eleusinian mysteries when I ask you to say just as little about your
    visits here and of me as you find possible ... even to Mr. Kenyon
    ... as to every other person whatever. As you know ... and yet more
    than you know ... I am in a peculiar position—and it does not follow
    that you should be ashamed of my friendship or that I should not be
    proud of yours, if we avoid making it a subject of conversation in
    high places, or low places. There! that is my request to you—or
    commentary on what you put 'off your mind' yesterday—probably quite
    unnecessary as either request or commentary; yet said on the chance of
    its not being so, because you seemed to mistake my remark about Mr.
    Kenyon.


    And your head, how is it? And do consider if it would not be wise and
    right on that account of your health, to go with Mr. Chorley? You can
    neither work nor enjoy while you are subject to attacks of the
    kind—and besides, and without reference to your present suffering and
    inconvenience, you ought not to let them master you and gather
    strength from time and habit; I am sure you ought not. Worse last week
    than ever, you see!—and no prospect, perhaps, of bringing out your
    "Bells" this autumn, without paying a cost too heavy!—Therefore ...
    the therefore is quite plain and obvious!—


    Friday.—Just as it is how anxious Flush and I are, to be delivered
    from you; by these sixteen heads of the discourse of one of us,
    written before your letter came. Ah, but I am serious—and you will
    consider—will you not? what is best to be done? and do it. You could
    write to me, you know, from the end of the world; if you could take
    the thought of me so far.


    And for me, no, and yet yes,—I will say this much; that I am not
    inclined to do you injustice, but justice, when you come here—the
    justice of wondering to myself how you can possibly, possibly, care to
    come. Which is true enough to be unanswerable, if you please—or I
    should not say it. 'As I began, so I shall end—' Did you, as I hope
    you did, thank your sister for Flush and for me? When you were gone,
    he graciously signified his intention of eating the cakes—brought the
    bag to me and emptied it without a drawback, from my hand, cake after
    cake. And I forgot the basket once again.


    And talking of Italy and the cardinals, and thinking of some cardinal
    points you are ignorant of, did you ever hear that I was one of


  
    
      
        
          
            
              
'those schismatiques
of Amsterdam'

              
            
          
        
      
    
  


    whom your Dr. Donne would have put into the dykes? unless he meant the
    Baptists, instead of the Independents, the holders of the Independent
    church principle. No—not 'schismatical,' I hope, hating as I do
    from the roots of my heart all that rending of the garment of Christ,
    which Christians are so apt to make the daily week-day of this
    Christianity so called—and caring very little for most dogmas and
    doxies in themselves—too little, as people say to me sometimes, (when
    they send me 'New Testaments' to learn from, with very kind
    intentions)—and believing that there is only one church in heaven and
    earth, with one divine High Priest to it; let exclusive religionists
    build what walls they please and bring out what chrisms. But I used to
    go with my father always, when I was able, to the nearest dissenting
    chapel of the Congregationalists—from liking the simplicity of that
    praying and speaking without books—and a little too from disliking
    the theory of state churches. There is a narrowness among the
    dissenters which is wonderful; an arid, grey Puritanism in the clefts
    of their souls: but it seems to me clear that they know what the
    'liberty of Christ' means, far better than those do who call
    themselves 'churchmen'; and stand altogether, as a body, on higher
    ground. And so, you see, when I talked of the sixteen points of my
    discourse, it was the foreshadowing of a coming event, and you have
    had it at last in the whole length and breadth of it. But it is not my
    fault if the wind began to blow so that I could not go out—as I
    intended—as I shall do to-morrow; and that you have received my
    dulness in a full libation of it, in consequence. My sisters said of
    the roses you blasphemed, yesterday, that they 'never saw such flowers
    anywhere—anywhere here in London—' and therefore if I had thought so
    myself before, it was not so wrong of me. I put your roses, you see,
    against my letter, to make it seem less dull—and yet I do not forget
    what you say about caring to hear from me—I mean, I do not affect
    to forget it.


    May God bless you, far longer than I can say so.

E.B.B.


