
Sunday Evening.
[Post-mark, August 4, 1845.]


    I said what you comment on, about Mr. Kenyon, because I feel I must
    always tell you the simple truth—and not being quite at liberty to
    communicate the whole story (though it would at once clear me from the
    charge of over-curiosity ... if I much cared for that!)—I made my
    first request in order to prevent your getting at any part of it from
    him which should make my withholding seem disingenuous for the
    moment—that is, till my explanation came, if it had an opportunity of
    coming. And then, when I fancied you were misunderstanding the reason
    of that request—and supposing I was ambitious of making a higher
    figure in his eyes than your own,—I then felt it 'on my mind' and
    so spoke ... a natural mode of relief surely! For, dear friend, I have
    once been untrue to you—when, and how, and why, you know—but I
    thought it pedantry and worse to hold by my words and increase their
    fault. You have forgiven me that one mistake, and I only refer to it
    now because if you should ever make that a precedent, and put any
    least, most trivial word of mine under the same category, you would
    wrong me as you never wronged human being:—and that is done with. For
    the other matter,—the talk of my visits, it is impossible that any
    hint of them can ooze out of the only three persons in the world to
    whom I ever speak of them—my father, mother and sister—to whom my
    appreciation of your works is no novelty since some years, and whom I
    made comprehend exactly your position and the necessity for the
    absolute silence I enjoined respecting the permission to see you. You
    may depend on them,—and Miss Mitford is in your keeping, mind,—and
    dear Mr. Kenyon, if there should be never so gentle a touch of
    'garrulous God-innocence' about those kind lips of his. Come, let me
    snatch at that clue out of the maze, and say how perfect, absolutely
    perfect, are those three or four pages in the 'Vision' which present
    the Poets—a line, a few words, and the man there,—one twang of the
    bow and the arrowhead in the white—Shelley's 'white ideal all
    statue-blind' is—perfect,—how can I coin words? And dear deaf old
    Hesiod—and—all, all are perfect, perfect! But 'the Moon's regality
    will hear no praise'—well then, will she hear blame? Can it be you,
    my own you past putting away, you are a schismatic and frequenter of
    Independent Dissenting Chapels? And you confess this to me—whose
    father and mother went this morning to the very Independent Chapel
    where they took me, all those years back, to be baptised—and where
    they heard, this morning, a sermon preached by the very minister who
    officiated on that other occasion! Now will you be particularly
    encouraged by this successful instance to bring forward any other
    point of disunion between us that may occur to you? Please do not—for
    so sure as you begin proving that there is a gulf fixed between us, so
    sure shall I end proving that ... Anne Radcliffe avert it!... that you
    are just my sister: not that I am much frightened, but there are such
    surprises in novels!—Blame the next,—yes, now this is to be real
    blame!—And I meant to call your attention to it before. Why, why, do
    you blot out, in that unutterably provoking manner, whole lines, not
    to say words, in your letters—(and in the criticism on the
    'Duchess')—if it is a fact that you have a second thought, does it
    cease to be as genuine a fact, that first thought you please to
    efface? Why give a thing and take a thing? Is there no significance in
    putting on record that your first impression was to a certain effect
    and your next to a certain other, perhaps completely opposite one? If
    any proceeding of yours could go near to deserve that harsh word
    'impertinent' which you have twice, in speech and writing, been
    pleased to apply to your observations on me; certainly this does go
    as near as can be—as there is but one step to take from Southampton
    pier to New York quay, for travellers Westward. Now will you lay this
    to heart and perpend—lest in my righteous indignation I [some words
    effaced here]! For my own health—it improves, thank you! And I shall
    go abroad all in good time, never fear. For my 'Bells,' Mr. Chorley
    tells me there is no use in the world of printing them before November
    at earliest—and by that time I shall get done with these Romances and
    certainly one Tragedy (that could go to press next week)—in proof
    of which I will bring you, if you let me, a few more hundreds of lines
    next Wednesday. But, 'my poet,' if I would, as is true, sacrifice all
    my works to do your fingers, even, good—what would I not offer up to
    prevent you staying ... perhaps to correct my very verses ... perhaps
    read and answer my very letters ... staying the production of more
    'Berthas' and 'Caterinas' and 'Geraldines,' more great and beautiful
    poems of which I shall be—how proud! Do not be punctual in paying
    tithes of thyme, mint, anise and cummin, and leaving unpaid the real
    weighty dues of the Law; nor affect a scrupulous acknowledgment of
    'what you owe me' in petty manners, while you leave me to settle such
    a charge, as accessory to the hiding the Talent, as best I can! I have
    thought of this again and again, and would have spoken of it to you,
    had I ever felt myself fit to speak of any subject nearer home and me
    and you than Rome and Cardinal Acton. For, observe, you have not done
    ... yes, the 'Prometheus,' no doubt ... but with that exception have
    you written much lately, as much as last year when 'you wrote all your
    best things' you said, I think? Yet you are better now than then.
    Dearest friend, I intend to write more, and very likely be praised
    more, now I care less than ever for it, but still more do I look to
    have you ever before me, in your place, and with more poetry and more
    praise still, and my own heartfelt praise ever on the top, like a
    flower on the water. I have said nothing of yesterday's storm ...
    thunder ... may you not have been out in it! The evening draws in,
    and I will walk out. May God bless you, and let you hold me by the
    hand till the end—Yes, dearest friend!

R.B.


