
[Post-mark, August 8, 1845.]


    Just to show what may be lost by my crossings out, I will tell you the
    story of the one in the 'Duchess'—and in fact it is almost worth
    telling to a metaphysician like you, on other grounds, that you may
    draw perhaps some psychological good from the absurdity of it. Hear,
    then. When I had done writing the sheet of annotations and reflections
    on your poem I took up my pencil to correct the passages reflected on
    with the reflections, by the crosses you may observe, just glancing
    over the writing as I did so. Well! and, where that erasure is, I
    found a line purporting to be extracted from your 'Duchess,' with
    sundry acute criticisms and objections quite undeniably strong,
    following after it; only, to my amazement, as I looked and looked, the
    line so acutely objected to and purporting, as I say, to, be taken
    from the 'Duchess,' was by no means to be found in the 'Duchess,' ...
    nor anything like it, ... and I am certain indeed that, in the
    'Duchess' or out of it, you never wrote such a bad line in your life.
    And so it became a proved thing to me that I had been enacting, in a
    mystery, both poet and critic together—and one so neutralizing the
    other, that I took all that pains you remark upon to cross myself out
    in my double capacity, ... and am now telling the story of it
    notwithstanding. And there's an obvious moral to the myth, isn't
    there? for critics who bark the loudest, commonly bark at their own
    shadow in the glass, as my Flush used to do long and loud, before he
    gained experience and learnt the γνωθι σεαυτον in the
    apparition of the brown dog with the glittering dilating eyes, ... and
    as I did, under the erasure. And another moral springs up of itself
    in this productive ground; for, you see, ... 'quand je m'efface il
    n'ya pas grand mal.'


    And I am to be made to work very hard, am I? But you should remember
    that if I did as much writing as last summer, I should not be able to
    do much else, ... I mean, to go out and walk about ... for really I
    think I could manage to read your poems and write as I am writing
    now, with ever so much head-work of my own going on at the same time.
    But the bodily exercise is different, and I do confess that the
    novelty of living more in the outer life for the last few months than
    I have done for years before, make me idle and inclined to be
    idle—and everybody is idle sometimes—even you perhaps—are you
    not? For me, you know, I do carpet-work—ask Mrs. Jameson—and I never
    pretend to be in a perpetual motion of mental industry. Still it may
    not be quite as bad as you think: I have done some work since
    'Prometheus'—only it is nothing worth speaking of and not a part of
    the romance-poem which is to be some day if I live for it—lyrics for
    the most part, which lie written illegibly in pure Egyptian—oh, there
    is time enough, and too much perhaps! and so let me be idle a little
    now, and enjoy your poems while I can. It is pure enjoyment and must
    be—but you do not know how much, or you would not talk as you do
    sometimes ... so wide of any possible application.


    And do not talk again of what you would 'sacrifice' for me. If you
    affect me by it, which is true, you cast me from you farther than ever
    in the next thought. That is true.


    The poems ... yours ... which you left with me,—are full of various
    power and beauty and character, and you must let me have my own
    gladness from them in my own way.


    Now I must end this letter. Did you go to Chelsea and hear the divine
    philosophy?


    Tell me the truth always ... will you? I mean such truths as may be
    painful to me though truths....

May God bless you, ever dear friend.
E.B.B.


