
[Post-mark, August 11, 1845.]


    But if it 'hurts' you to read and write ever so little, why should I
    be asked to write ... for instance ... 'before Tuesday?' And I did
    mean to say before to-day, that I wish you never would write to me
    when you are not quite well, as once or twice you have done if not
    much oftener; because there is not a necessity, ... and I do not
    choose that there should ever be, or seem a necessity, ... do you
    understand? And as a matter of personal preference, it is natural for
    me to like the silence that does not hurt you, better than the speech
    that does. And so, remember.


    And talking of what may 'hurt' you and me, you would smile, as I have
    often done in the midst of my vexation, if you knew the persecution I
    have been subjected to by the people who call themselves (lucus a non
    lucendo) 'the faculty,' and set themselves against the exercise of
    other people's faculties, as a sure way to death and destruction. The
    modesty and simplicity with which one's physicians tell one not to
    think or feel, just as they would tell one not to walk out in the dew,
    would be quite amusing, if it were not too tryingly stupid sometimes.
    I had a doctor once who thought he had done everything because he had
    carried the inkstand out of the room—'Now,' he said, 'you will have
    such a pulse to-morrow.' He gravely thought poetry a sort of
    disease—a sort of fungus of the brain—and held as a serious opinion,
    that nobody could be properly well who exercised it as an art—which
    was true (he maintained) even of men—he had studied the physiology of
    poets, 'quotha'—but that for women, it was a mortal malady and
    incompatible with any common show of health under any circumstances.
    And then came the damnatory clause in his experience ... that he had
    never known 'a system' approaching mine in 'excitability' ... except
    Miss Garrow's ... a young lady who wrote verses for Lady Blessington's
    annuals ... and who was the only other female rhymer he had had the
    misfortune of attending. And she was to die in two years, though she
    was dancing quadrilles then (and has lived to do the same by the
    polka), and I, of course, much sooner, if I did not ponder these
    things, and amend my ways, and take to reading 'a course of history'!!
    Indeed I do not exaggerate. And just so, for a long while I was
    persecuted and pestered ... vexed thoroughly sometimes ... my own
    family, instructed to sing the burden out all day long—until the time
    when the subject was suddenly changed by my heart being broken by that
    great stone that fell out of Heaven. Afterwards I was let do anything
    I could best ... which was very little, until last year—and the
    working, last year, did much for me in giving me stronger roots down
    into life, ... much. But think of that absurd reasoning that went
    before!—the niaiserie of it! For, granting all the premises all
    round, it is not the utterance of a thought that can hurt anybody;
    while only the utterance is dependent on the will; and so, what can
    the taking away of an inkstand do? Those physicians are such
    metaphysicians! It's curious to listen to them. And it's wise to leave
    off listening: though I have met with excessive kindness among them,
    ... and do not refer to Dr. Chambers in any of this, of course.


    I am very glad you went to Chelsea—and it seemed finer afterwards, on
    purpose to make room for the divine philosophy. Which reminds me (the
    going to Chelsea) that my brother Henry confessed to me yesterday,
    with shame and confusion of face, to having mistaken and taken your
    umbrella for another belonging to a cousin of ours then in the house.
    He saw you ... without conjecturing, just at the moment, who you were.
    Do you conjecture sometimes that I live all alone here like Mariana
    in the moated Grange? It is not quite so—: but where there are many,
    as with us, every one is apt to follow his own devices—and my father
    is out all day and my brothers and sisters are in and out, and with
    too large a public of noisy friends for me to bear, ... and I see them
    only at certain hours, ... except, of course, my sisters. And then as
    you have 'a reputation' and are opined to talk generally in blank
    verse, it is not likely that there should be much irreverent rushing
    into this room when you are known to be in it.


    The flowers are ... so beautiful! Indeed it was wrong, though, to send
    me the last. It was not just to the lawful possessors and enjoyers of
    them. That it was kind to me I do not forget.


    You are too teachable a pupil in the art of obliterating—and omne
    ignotum pro terrifico ... and therefore I won't frighten you by
    walking to meet you for fear of being frightened myself.


    So good-bye until Tuesday. I ought not to make you read all this, I
    know, whether you like to read it or not: and I ought not to have
    written it, having no better reason than because I like to write on
    and on. You have better reasons for thinking me very weak—and I,
    too good ones for not being able to reproach you for that natural and
    necessary opinion.

May God bless you my dearest friend.
E.B.B.


