
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, August 15, 1845.]


    Do you know, dear friend, it is no good policy to stop up all the
    vents of my feeling, nor leave one for safety's sake, as you will do,
    let me caution you never so repeatedly. I know, quite well enough,
    that your 'kindness' is not so apparent, even, in this instance of
    correcting my verses, as in many other points—but on such points, you
    lift a finger to me and I am dumb.... Am I not to be allowed a word
    here neither?


    I remember, in the first season of German Opera here, when 'Fidelio's'
    effects were going, going up to the gallery in order to get the best
    of the last chorus—get its oneness which you do—and, while perched
    there an inch under the ceiling, I was amused with the enormous
    enthusiasm of an elderly German (we thought,—I and a cousin of
    mine)—whose whole body broke out in billow, heaved and swayed in the
    perfection of his delight, hands, head, feet, all tossing and striving
    to utter what possessed him. Well—next week, we went again to the
    Opera, and again mounted at the proper time, but the crowd was
    greater, and our mild great faced white haired red cheeked German
    was not to be seen, not at first—for as the glory was at its full, my
    cousin twisted me round and made me see an arm, only an arm, all the
    body of its owner being amalgamated with a dense crowd on each side,
    before, and—not behind, because they, the crowd, occupied the last
    benches, over which we looked—and this arm waved and exulted as if
    'for the dignity of the whole body,'—relieved it of its dangerous
    accumulation of repressed excitability. When the crowd broke up all
    the rest of the man disengaged itself by slow endeavours, and there
    stood our friend confessed—as we were sure!


    —Now, you would have bade him keep his arm quiet? 'Lady Geraldine,
    you would!'


    I have read those novels—but I must keep that word of words,
    'genius'—for something different—'talent' will do here surely.


    There lies 'Consuelo'—done with!


    I shall tell you frankly that it strikes me as precisely what in
    conventional language with the customary silliness is styled a
    woman's book, in its merits and defects,—and supremely timid in all
    the points where one wants, and has a right to expect, some fruit of
    all the pretence and George Sandism. These are occasions when one
    does say, in the phrase of her school, 'que la Femme parle!' or what
    is better, let her act! and how does Consuelo comfort herself on such
    an emergency? Why, she bravely lets the uninspired people throw down
    one by one their dearest prejudices at her feet, and then, like a
    very actress, picks them up, like so many flowers, returning them to
    the breast of the owners with a smile and a courtesy and trips off the
    stage with a glance at the Pit. Count Christian, Baron Frederic,
    Baroness—what is her name—all open their arms, and Consuelo will not
    consent to entail disgrace &c. &c. No, you say—she leaves them in
    order to solve the problem of her true feeling, whether she can really
    love Albert; but remember that this is done, (that is, so much of it
    as ever is done, and as determines her to accept his hand at the
    very last)—this is solved sometime about the next morning—or
    earlier—I forget—and in the meantime, Albert gets that 'benefit of
    the doubt' of which chapter the last informs you. As for the
    hesitation and self examination on the matter of that Anzoleto—the
    writer is turning over the leaves of a wrong dictionary, seeking help
    from Psychology, and pretending to forget there is such a thing as
    Physiology. Then, that horrible Porpora:—if George Sand gives him
    to a Consuelo for an absolute master, in consideration of his services
    specified, and is of opinion that they warrant his conduct, or at
    least, oblige submission to it,—then, I find her objections to the
    fatherly rule of Frederic perfectly impertinent—he having a few
    claims upon the gratitude of Prussia also, in his way, I believe! If
    the strong ones will make the weak ones lead them—then, for
    Heaven's sake, let this dear old all-abused world keep on its course
    without these outcries and tearings of hair, and don't be for ever
    goading the Karls and other trodden-down creatures till they get their
    carbines in order (very rationally) to abate the nuisance—when you
    make the man a long speech against some enormity he is about to
    commit, and adjure and beseech and so forth, till he throws down the
    aforesaid carbine, falls on his knees, and lets the Frederic go
    quietly on his way to keep on killing his thousands after the fashion
    that moved your previous indignation. Now is that right,
    consequential—that is, inferential; logically deduced, going
    straight to the end—manly?


    The accessories are not the Principal, the adjuncts—the essence, nor
    the ornamental incidents the book's self, so what matters it if the
    portraits are admirable, the descriptions eloquent, (eloquent, there
    it is—that is her characteristic—what she has to speak, she
    speaks out, speaks volubly forth, too well, inasmuch as you say,
    advancing a step or two, 'And now speak as completely here'—and she
    says nothing)—but all that, another could do, as others have
    done—but 'la femme qui parle'—Ah, that, is this all? So I am not
    George Sand's—she teaches me nothing—I look to her for nothing.


    I am ever yours, dearest friend. How I write to you—page on page! But
    Tuesday—who could wait till then! Shall I not hear from you?

God bless you ever
R.B.


