
Saturday.
[Post-mark, August 16, 1845.]


    But what likeness is there between opposites; and what has 'M.
    l'Italien' to do with the said 'elderly German'? See how little! For
    to bring your case into point, somebody should have been playing on a
    Jew's harp for the whole of the orchestra; and the elderly German
    should have quoted something about 'Harp of Judah' to the Venetian
    behind him! And there, you would have proved your analogy!—Because
    you see, my dear friend, it was not the expression, but the thing
    expressed, I cried out against—the exaggeration in your mind. I am
    sorry when I write what you do not like—but I have instincts and
    impulses too strong for me when you say things which put me into such
    a miserably false position in respect to you—as for instance, when in
    this very last letter (oh, I must tell you!) you talk of my
    'correcting your verses'! My correcting your verses!!!—Now is that
    a thing for you to say?—And do you really imagine that if I kept that
    happily imagined phrase in my thoughts, I should be able to tell you
    one word of my impressions from your poetry, ever, ever again? Do you
    not see at once what a disqualifying and paralysing phrase it must be,
    of simple necessity? So it is I who have reason to complain, ... it
    appears to me, ... and by no means you—and in your 'second
    consideration' you become aware of it, I do not at all doubt.


    As to 'Consuelo' I agree with nearly all that you say of it—though
    George Sand, we are to remember, is greater than 'Consuelo,' and not
    to be depreciated according to the defects of that book, nor
    classified as 'femme qui parle' ... she who is man and woman together,
    ... judging her by the standard of even that book in the nobler
    portions of it. For the inconsequency of much in the book, I admit it
    of course—and you will admit that it is the rarest of phenomena
    when men ... men of logic ... follow their own opinions into their
    obvious results—nobody, you know, ever thinks of doing such a thing:
    to pursue one's own inferences is to rush in where angels ... perhaps
    ... do not fear to tread, ... but where there will not be much other
    company. So the want of practical logic shall be a human fault rather
    than a womanly one, if you please: and you must please also to
    remember that 'Consuelo' is only 'half the orange'; and that when you
    complain of its not being a whole one, you overlook that hand which is
    holding to you the 'Comtesse de Rudolstadt' in three volumes! Not that
    I, who have read the whole, profess a full satisfaction about Albert
    and the rest—and Consuelo is made to be happy by a mere clap-trap at
    last: and Mme. Dudevant has her specialities,—in which, other women,
    I fancy, have neither part nor lot, ... even here!—Altogether, the
    book is a sort of rambling 'Odyssey,' a female 'Odyssey,' if you like,
    but full of beauty and nobleness, let the faults be where they may.
    And then, I like those long, long books, one can live away into ...
    leaving the world and above all oneself, quite at the end of the
    avenue of palms—quite out of sight and out of hearing!—Oh, I have
    felt something like that so often—so often! and you never felt
    it, and never will, I hope.


    But if Bulwer had written nothing but the 'Ernest Maltravers' books,
    you would think perhaps more highly of him. Do you not think it
    possible now? It is his most impotent struggling into poetry, which
    sets about proving a negative of genius on him—that, which the
    Athenæum praises as 'respectable attainment in various walks of
    literature'—! like the Athenæum, isn't it? and worthy praise, to
    be administered by professed judges of art? What is to be expected of
    the public, when the teachers of the public teach so?—


    When you come on Tuesday, do not forget the MS. if any is done—only
    don't let it be done so as to tire and hurt you—mind! And good-bye
    until Tuesday, from

E.B.B.


