
Thursday, 7 o'clock.
[Post-mark, August 21, 1845.]


    I feel at home, this blue early morning, now that I sit down to write
    (or, speak, as I try and fancy) to you, after a whole day with those
    'other friends'—dear good souls, whom I should be so glad to serve,
    and to whom service must go by way of last will and testament, if a
    few more hours of 'social joy,' 'kindly intercourse,' &c., fall to my
    portion. My friend the Countess began proceedings (when I first saw
    her, not yesterday) by asking 'if I had got as much money as I
    expected by any works published of late?'—to which I answered, of
    course, 'exactly as much'—è grazioso! (All the same, if you were to
    ask her, or the like of her, 'how much the stone-work of the Coliseum
    would fetch, properly burned down to lime?'—she would shudder from
    head to foot and call you 'barbaro' with good Trojan heart.) Now you
    suppose—(watch my rhetorical figure here)—you suppose I am going to
    congratulate myself on being so much for the better, en pays de
    connaissance, with my 'other friend,' E.B.B., number 2—or 200, why
    not?—whereas I mean to 'fulmine over Greece,' since thunder frightens
    you, for all the laurels,—and to have reason for your taking my own
    part and lot to yourself—I do, will, must, and will, again, wonder
    at you and admire you, and so on to the climax. It is a fixed,
    immovable thing: so fixed that I can well forego talking about it. But
    if to talk you once begin, 'the King shall enjoy (or receive quietly)
    his own again'—I wear no bright weapon out of that Panoply ... or
    Panoplite, as I think you call Nonnus, nor ever, like Leigh Hunt's
    'Johnny, ever blythe and bonny, went singing Nonny, nonny' and see
    to-morrow, what a vengeance I will take for your 'mere suspicion in
    that kind'! But to the serious matter ... nay, I said yesterday, I
    believe—keep off that Burgess—he is stark staring mad—mad, do you
    know? The last time I met him he told me he had recovered I forget how
    many of the lost books of Thucydides—found them imbedded in Suidas (I
    think), and had disengaged them from his Greek, without loss of a
    letter, 'by an instinct he, Burgess, had'—(I spell his name wrongly
    to help the proper hiss at the end). Then, once on a time, he found
    in the 'Christus Patiens,' an odd dozen of lines, clearly dropped out
    of the 'Prometheus,' and proving that Æschylus was aware of the
    invention of gunpowder. He wanted to help Dr. Leonhard Schmitz in his
    'Museum'—and scared him, as Schmitz told me. What business has he,
    Burges, with English verse—and what on earth, or under it, has Miss
    Thomson to do with him. If she must displease one of two, why is Mr.
    B. not to be thanked and 'sent to feed,' as the French say prettily?
    At all events, do pray see what he has presumed to alter ... you can
    alter at sufficient warrant, profit by suggestion, I should think! But
    it is all Miss Thomson's shame and fault: because she is quite in her
    propriety, saying to such intermeddlers, gently for the sake of their
    poor weak heads, 'very good, I dare say, very desirable emendations,
    only the work is not mine, you know, but my friend's, and you must no
    more alter it without her leave, than alter this sketch, this
    illustration, because you think you could mend Ariadne's face or
    figure,—Fecit Tizianus, scripsit E.B.B.' Dear friend, you will tell
    Miss Thomson to stop further proceedings, will you not? There! only,
    do mind what I say?


    And now—till to-morrow! It seems an age since I saw you. I want to
    catch our first post ... (this phrase I ought to get stereotyped—I
    need it so constantly). The day is fine ... you will profit by it, I
    trust. 'Flush, wag your tail and grow restless and scratch at the
    door!'


    God bless you,—my one friend, without an 'other'—bless you ever—

R.B.


