
Wednesday.
[Post-mark, August 25, 1845.]


    But what have I done that you should ask what have you done? I
    have not brought any accusation, have I ... no, nor thought any, I
    am sure—and it was only the 'kindness and considerateness'—argument
    that was irresistible as a thing to be retorted, when your thanks came
    so naturally and just at the corner of an application. And then, you
    know, it is gravely true, seriously true, sadly true, that I am always
    expecting to hear or to see how tired you are at last of me!—sooner
    or later, you know!—But I did not mean any seriousness in that
    letter. No, nor did I mean ... (to pass to another question ...) to
    provoke you to the

Mister Hayley ... so are you....


    reply complimentary. All I observed concerning yourself, was the
    combination—which not an idiom in chivalry could treat
    grammatically as a thing common to me and you, inasmuch as everyone
    who has known me for half a day, may know that, if there is anything
    peculiar in me, it lies for the most part in an extraordinary
    deficiency in this and this and this, ... there is no need to describe
    what. Only nuns of the strictest sect of the nunneries are rather
    wiser in some points, and have led less restricted lives than I have
    in others. And if it had not been for my 'carpet-work'—


    Well—and do you know that I have, for the last few years, taken quite
    to despise book-knowledge and its effect on the mind—I mean when
    people live by it as most readers by profession do, ... cloistering
    their souls under these roofs made with heads, when they might be
    under the sky. Such people grow dark and narrow and low, with all
    their pains.


    Friday.—I was writing you see before you came—and now I go on in
    haste to speak 'off my mind' some things which are on it. First ... of
    yourself; how can it be that you are unwell again, ... and that you
    should talk (now did you not?—did I not hear you say so?) of being
    'weary in your soul' ... you? What should make you, dearest
    friend, weary in your soul; or out of spirits in any way?—Do ... tell
    me.... I was going to write without a pause—and almost I might,
    perhaps, ... even as one of the two hundred of your friends, ...
    almost I might say out that 'Do tell me.' Or is it (which I am
    inclined to think most probable) that you are tired of a same life and
    want change? It may happen to anyone sometimes, and is independent of
    your will and choice, you know—and I know, and the whole world knows:
    and would it not therefore be wise of you, in that case, to fold your
    life new again and go abroad at once? What can make you weary in your
    soul, is a problem to me. You are the last from whom I should have
    expected such a word. And you did say so, I think. I think that it
    was not a mistake of mine. And you, ... with a full liberty, and the
    world in your hand for every purpose and pleasure of it!—Or is it
    that, being unwell, your spirits are affected by that? But then you
    might be more unwell than you like to admit—. And I am teasing you
    with talking of it ... am I not?—and being disagreeable is only one
    third of the way towards being useful, it is good to remember in time.


    And then the next thing to write off my mind is ... that you must not,
    you must not, make an unjust opinion out of what I said to-day. I have
    been uncomfortable since, lest you should—and perhaps it would have
    been better if I had not said it apart from all context in that way;
    only that you could not long be a friend of mine without knowing and
    seeing what so lies on the surface. But then, ... as far as I am
    concerned, ... no one cares less for a 'will' than I do (and this
    though I never had one, ... in clear opposition to your theory which
    holds generally nevertheless) for a will in the common things of life.
    Every now and then there must of course be a crossing and
    vexation—but in one's mere pleasures and fantasies, one would rather
    be crossed and vexed a little than vex a person one loves ... and it
    is possible to get used to the harness and run easily in it at last;
    and there is a side-world to hide one's thoughts in, and 'carpet-work'
    to be immoral on in spite of Mrs. Jameson, ... and the word
    'literature' has, with me, covered a good deal of liberty as you must
    see ... real liberty which is never enquired into—and it has happened
    throughout my life by an accident (as far as anything is accident)
    that my own sense of right and happiness on any important point of
    overt action, has never run contrariwise to the way of obedience
    required of me ... while in things not exactly overt, I and all of
    us are apt to act sometimes up to the limit of our means of acting,
    with shut doors and windows, and no waiting for cognisance or
    permission. Ah—and that last is the worst of it all perhaps! to be
    forced into concealments from the heart naturally nearest to us; and
    forced away from the natural source of counsel and strength!—and
    then, the disingenuousness—the cowardice—the 'vices of
    slaves'!—and everyone you see ... all my brothers, ... constrained
    bodily into submission ... apparent submission at least ... by that
    worst and most dishonouring of necessities, the necessity of living,
    everyone of them all, except myself, being dependent in money-matters
    on the inflexible will ... do you see? But what you do not see, what
    you cannot see, is the deep tender affection behind and below all
    those patriarchal ideas of governing grown up children 'in the way
    they must go!' and there never was (under the strata) a truer
    affection in a father's heart ... no, nor a worthier heart in itself
    ... a heart loyaller and purer, and more compelling to gratitude and
    reverence, than his, as I see it! The evil is in the system—and he
    simply takes it to be his duty to rule, and to make happy according to
    his own views of the propriety of happiness—he takes it to be his
    duty to rule like the Kings of Christendom, by divine right. But he
    loves us through and through it—and I, for one, love him! and
    when, five years ago, I lost what I loved best in the world beyond
    comparison and rivalship ... far better than himself as he knew ...
    for everyone who knew me could not choose but know what was my first
    and chiefest affection ... when I lost that, ... I felt that he
    stood the nearest to me on the closed grave ... or by the unclosing
    sea ... I do not know which nor could ask. And I will tell you that
    not only he has been kind and patient and forbearing to me through the
    tedious trial of this illness (far more trying to standers by than you
    have an idea of perhaps) but that he was generous and forbearing in
    that hour of bitter trial, and never reproached me as he might have
    done and as my own soul has not spared—never once said to me then or
    since, that if it had not been for me, the crown of his house would
    not have fallen. He never did ... and he might have said it, and
    more—and I could have answered nothing. Nothing, except that I had
    paid my own price—and that the price I paid was greater than his
    loss ... his!! For see how it was; and how, 'not with my hand but
    heart,' I was the cause or occasion of that misery—and though not
    with the intention of my heart but with its weakness, yet the
    occasion, any way!


    They sent me down you know to Torquay—Dr. Chambers saying that I
    could not live a winter in London. The worst—what people call the
    worst—was apprehended for me at that time. So I was sent down with my
    sister to my aunt there—and he, my brother whom I loved so, was sent
    too, to take us there and return. And when the time came for him to
    leave me, I, to whom he was the dearest of friends and brothers in
    one ... the only one of my family who ... well, but I cannot write of
    these things; and it is enough to tell you that he was above us all,
    better than us all, and kindest and noblest and dearest to me,
    beyond comparison, any comparison, as I said—and when the time came
    for him to leave me I, weakened by illness, could not master my
    spirits or drive back my tears—and my aunt kissed them away instead
    of reproving me as she should have done; and said that she would
    take care that I should not be grieved ... she! ... and so she sate
    down and wrote a letter to Papa to tell him that he would 'break my
    heart' if he persisted in calling away my brother—As if hearts were
    broken so! I have thought bitterly since that my heart did not break
    for a good deal more than that! And Papa's answer was—burnt into
    me, as with fire, it is—that 'under such circumstances he did not
    refuse to suspend his purpose, but that he considered it to be very
    wrong in me to exact such a thing.' So there was no separation
    then: and month after month passed—and sometimes I was better and
    sometimes worse—and the medical men continued to say that they would
    not answer for my life ... they! if I were agitated—and so there was
    no more talk of a separation. And once he held my hand, ... how I
    remember! and said that he 'loved me better than them all and that he
    would not leave me ... till I was well,' he said! how I remember
    that! And ten days from that day the boat had left the shore which
    never returned; never—and he had left me! gone! For three days we
    waited—and I hoped while I could—oh—that awful agony of three days!
    And the sun shone as it shines to-day, and there was no more wind than
    now; and the sea under the windows was like this paper for
    smoothness—and my sisters drew the curtains back that I might see for
    myself how smooth the sea was, and how it could hurt nobody—and other
    boats came back one by one.


    Remember how you wrote in your 'Gismond'


  
    
      
        
          
            
What says the body when they spring
Some monstrous torture-engine's whole
Strength on it? No more says the soul,

            
          
        
      
    
  


    and you never wrote anything which lived with me more than that.
    It is such a dreadful truth. But you knew it for truth, I hope, by
    your genius, and not by such proof as mine—I, who could not speak or
    shed a tear, but lay for weeks and months half conscious, half
    unconscious, with a wandering mind, and too near to God under the
    crushing of His hand, to pray at all. I expiated all my weak tears
    before, by not being able to shed then one tear—and yet they were
    forbearing—and no voice said 'You have done this.'


    Do not notice what I have written to you, my dearest friend. I have
    never said so much to a living being—I never could speak or write
    of it. I asked no question from the moment when my last hope went: and
    since then, it has been impossible for me to speak what was in me. I
    have borne to do it to-day and to you, but perhaps if you were to
    write—so do not let this be noticed between us again—do not! And
    besides there is no need! I do not reproach myself with such acrid
    thoughts as I had once—I know that I would have died ten times over
    for him, and that therefore though it was wrong of me to be weak,
    and I have suffered for it and shall learn by it I hope; remorse is
    not precisely the word for me—not at least in its full sense. Still
    you will comprehend from what I have told you how the spring of life
    must have seemed to break within me then; and how natural it has
    been for me to loathe the living on—and to lose faith (even without
    the loathing), to lose faith in myself ... which I have done on some
    points utterly. It is not from the cause of illness—no. And you will
    comprehend too that I have strong reasons for being grateful to the
    forbearance.... It would have been cruel, you think, to reproach me.
    Perhaps so! yet the kindness and patience of the desisting from
    reproach, are positive things all the same.


    Shall I be too late for the post, I wonder? Wilson tells me that you
    were followed up-stairs yesterday (I write on Saturday this latter
    part) by somebody whom you probably took for my father. Which is
    Wilson's idea—and I hope not yours. No—it was neither father nor
    other relative of mine, but an old friend in rather an ill temper.


    And so good-bye until Tuesday. Perhaps I shall ... not ... hear from
    you to-night. Don't let the tragedy or aught else do you harm—will
    you? and try not to be 'weary in your soul' any more—and forgive me
    this gloomy letter I half shrink from sending you, yet will send.

May God bless you.
E.B.B.


