
[Post-mark, August 30, 1845.]


    Can you understand me so, dearest friend, after all? Do you see
    me—when I am away, or with you—'taking offence' at words, 'being
    vexed' at words, or deeds of yours, even if I could not immediately
    trace them to their source of entire, pure kindness; as I have
    hitherto done in every smallest instance?


    I believe in you absolutely, utterly—I believe that when you bade
    me, that time, be silent—that such was your bidding, and I was
    silent—dare I say I think you did not know at that time the power I
    have over myself, that I could sit and speak and listen as I have done
    since? Let me say now—this only once—that I loved you from my
    soul, and gave you my life, so much of it as you would take,—and all
    that is done, not to be altered now: it was, in the nature of the
    proceeding, wholly independent of any return on your part. I will not
    think on extremes you might have resorted to; as it is, the assurance
    of your friendship, the intimacy to which you admit me, now, make
    the truest, deepest joy of my life—a joy I can never think fugitive
    while we are in life, because I know, as to me, I could not
    willingly displease you,—while, as to you, your goodness and
    understanding will always see to the bottom of involuntary or ignorant
    faults—always help me to correct them. I have done now. If I thought
    you were like other women I have known, I should say so
    much!—but—(my first and last word—I believe in you!)—what you
    could and would give me, of your affection, you would give nobly and
    simply and as a giver—you would not need that I tell you—(tell
    you!)—what would be supreme happiness to me in the event—however
    distant—


    I repeat ... I call on your justice to remember, on your intelligence
    to believe ... that this is merely a more precise stating the first
    subject; to put an end to any possible misunderstanding—to prevent
    your henceforth believing that because I do not write, from thinking
    too deeply of you, I am offended, vexed &c. &c. I will never recur to
    this, nor shall you see the least difference in my manner next Monday:
    it is indeed, always before me ... how I know nothing of you and
    yours. But I think I ought to have spoken when I did—and to speak
    clearly ... or more clearly what I do, as it is my pride and duty to
    fall back, now, on the feeling with which I have been in the
    meantime—Yours—God bless you—

R.B.


    Let me write a few words to lead into Monday—and say, you have
    probably received my note. I am much better—with a little headache,
    which is all, and fast going this morning. Of yours you say nothing—I
    trust you see your ... dare I say your duty in the Pisa affair, as
    all else must see it—shall I hear on Monday? And my 'Saul' that you
    are so lenient to.

Bless you ever—


