
Sunday.
[August 31, 1845.]


    I did not think you were angry—I never said so. But you might
    reasonably have been wounded a little, if you had suspected me of
    blaming you for any bearing of yours towards myself; and this was the
    amount of my fear—or rather hope ... since I conjectured most that
    you were not well. And after all you did think ... do think ... that
    in some way or for some moment I blamed you, disbelieved you,
    distrusted you—or why this letter? How have I provoked this letter?
    Can I forgive myself for having even seemed to have provoked it? and
    will you believe me that if for the past's sake you sent it, it was
    unnecessary, and if for the future's, irrelevant? Which I say from no
    want of sensibility to the words of it—your words always make
    themselves felt—but in fulness of purpose not to suffer you to hold
    to words because they have been said, nor to say them as if to be
    holden by them. Why, if a thousand more such words were said by you to
    me, how could they operate upon the future or present, supposing me to
    choose to keep the possible modification of your feelings, as a
    probability, in my sight and yours? Can you help my sitting with the
    doors all open if I think it right? I do attest to you—while I trust
    you, as you must see, in word and act, and while I am confident that
    no human being ever stood higher or purer in the eyes of another, than
    you do in mine,—that you would still stand high and remain
    unalterably my friend, if the probability in question became a fact,
    as now at this moment. And this I must say, since you have said other
    things: and this alone, which I have said, concerns the future, I
    remind you earnestly.


    My dearest friend—you have followed the most generous of impulses
    in your whole bearing to me—and I have recognised and called by its
    name, in my heart, each one of them. Yet I cannot help adding that, of
    us two, yours has not been quite the hardest part ... I mean, to a
    generous nature like your own, to which every sort of nobleness comes
    easily. Mine has been more difficult—and I have sunk under it again
    and again: and the sinking and the effort to recover the duty of a
    lost position, may have given me an appearance of vacillation and
    lightness, unworthy at least of you, and perhaps of both of us.
    Notwithstanding which appearance, it was right and just (only just) of
    you, to believe in me—in my truth—because I have never failed to you
    in it, nor been capable of such failure: the thing I have said, I
    have meant ... always: and in things I have not said, the silence has
    had a reason somewhere different perhaps from where you looked for it.
    And this brings me to complaining that you, who profess to believe in
    me, do yet obviously believe that it was only merely silence, which I
    required of you on one occasion—and that if I had 'known your power
    over yourself,' I should not have minded ... no! In other words you
    believe of me that I was thinking just of my own (what shall I call it
    for a motive base and small enough?) my own scrupulousness ... freedom
    from embarrassment! of myself in the least of me; in the tying of my
    shoestrings, say!—so much and no more! Now this is so wrong, as to
    make me impatient sometimes in feeling it to be your impression: I
    asked for silence—but also and chiefly for the putting away of ...
    you know very well what I asked for. And this was sincerely done, I
    attest to you. You wrote once to me ... oh, long before May and the
    day we met: that you 'had been so happy, you should be now justified
    to yourself in taking any step most hazardous to the happiness of your
    life'—but if you were justified, could I be therefore justified in
    abetting such a step,—the step of wasting, in a sense, your best
    feelings ... of emptying your water gourds into the sand? What I
    thought then I think now—just what any third person, knowing you,
    would think, I think and feel. I thought too, at first, that the
    feeling on your part was a mere generous impulse, likely to expand
    itself in a week perhaps. It affects me and has affected me, very
    deeply, more than I dare attempt to say, that you should persist
    so—and if sometimes I have felt, by a sort of instinct, that after
    all you would not go on to persist, and that (being a man, you know)
    you might mistake, a little unconsciously, the strength of your own
    feeling; you ought not to be surprised; when I felt it was more
    advantageous and happier for you that it should be so. In any case,
    I shall never regret my own share in the events of this summer, and
    your friendship will be dear to me to the last. You know I told you
    so—not long since. And as to what you say otherwise, you are right in
    thinking that I would not hold by unworthy motives in avoiding to
    speak what you had any claim to hear. But what could I speak that
    would not be unjust to you? Your life! if you gave it to me and I put
    my whole heart into it; what should I put but anxiety, and more
    sadness than you were born to? What could I give you, which it would
    not be ungenerous to give? Therefore we must leave this subject—and I
    must trust you to leave it without one word more; (too many have been
    said already—but I could not let your letter pass quite silently ...
    as if I had nothing to do but to receive all as matter of course
    so!) while you may well trust me to remember to my life's end, as
    the grateful remember; and to feel, as those do who have felt sorrow
    (for where these pits are dug, the water will stand), the full price
    of your regard. May God bless you, my dearest friend. I shall send
    this letter after I have seen you, and hope you may not have expected
    to hear sooner.

Ever yours,   

E.B.B.


    Monday, 6 p.m.—I send in disobedience to your commands, Mrs.
    Shelley's book—but when books accumulate and when besides, I want to
    let you have the American edition of my poems ... famous for all
    manner of blunders, you know; what is to be done but have recourse to
    the parcel-medium? You were in jest about being at Pisa before or as
    soon as we were?—oh no—that must not be indeed—we must wait a
    little!—even if you determine to go at all, which is a question of
    doubtful expediency. Do take more exercise, this week, and make war
    against those dreadful sensations in the head—now, will you?


