
[Post-mark, September 4, 1845.]


    Indeed my headaches are not worth enquiring about—I mean, they are
    not of the slightest consequence, and seldom survive the remedy of a
    cup of coffee. I only wish it were the same with everybody—I mean,
    with every head! Also there is nothing the matter otherwise—and I
    am going to prove my right to a 'clean bill of health' by going into
    the park in ten minutes. Twice round the inner enclosure is what I can
    compass now—which is equal to once round the world—is it not?


    I had just time to be afraid that the parcel had not reached you. The
    reason why I sent you the poems was that I had a few copies to give to
    my personal friends, and so, wished you to have one; and it was quite
    to please myself and not to please you that I made you have it; and
    if you put it into the 'plum-tree' to hide the errata, I shall be
    pleased still, if not rather more. Only let me remember to tell you
    this time in relation to those books and the question asked of
    yourself by your noble Romans, that just as I was enclosing my
    sixty-pounds debt to Mr. Moxon, I did actually and miraculously
    receive a remittance of fourteen pounds from the selfsame bookseller
    of New York who agreed last year to print my poems at his own risk and
    give me 'ten per cent on the profit.' Not that I ever asked for such a
    thing! They were the terms offered. And I always considered the 'per
    centage' as quite visionary ... put in for the sake of effect, to make
    the agreement look better! But no—you see! One's poetry has a real
    'commercial value,' if you do but take it far away enough from the
    'civilization of Europe.' When you get near the backwoods and the red
    Indians, it turns out to be nearly as good for something as
    'cabbages,' after all! Do you remember what you said to me of cabbages
    versus poems, in one of the first letters you ever wrote to me?—of
    selling cabbages and buying Punches?


    People complain of Dr. Chambers and call him rough and
    unfeeling—neither of which I ever found him for a moment—and I
    like him for his truthfulness, which is the nature of the man, though
    it is essential to medical morality never to let a patient think
    himself mortal while it is possible to prevent it, and even Dr.
    Chambers may incline to this on occasion. Still he need not have said
    all the good he said to me on Saturday—he used not to say any of
    it; and he must have thought some of it: and, any way, the Pisa-case
    is strengthened all round by his opinion and injunction, so that all
    my horror and terror at the thoughts of his visit, (and it's really
    true that I would rather suffer to a certain extent than be cured
    by means of those doctors!) had some compensation. How are you? do not
    forget to say! I found among some papers to-day, a note of yours which
    I asked Mr. Kenyon to give me for an autograph, two years ago.


    May God bless you, dearest friend. And I have a dispensation from
    'beef and porter' εις τους αιωνας. 'On no account' was the
    answer!


