
Friday Afternoon.
[Post-mark, September 5, 1845.]


    What you tell me of Dr. Chambers, 'all the good of you' he said, and
    all I venture to infer; this makes me most happy and thankful. Do you
    use to attach our old τυφλας

ελπιδας (and the practice of
    instilling them) to that medical science in which Prometheus boasted
    himself proficient? I had thought the 'faculty' dealt in fears, on the
    contrary, and scared you into obedience: but I know most about the
    doctors in Molière. However the joyous truth is—must be, that you are
    better, and if one could transport you quietly to Pisa, save you all
    worry,—what might one not expect!


    When I know your own intentions—measures, I should say, respecting
    your journey—mine will of course be submitted to you—it will just be
    'which day next—month'?—Not week, alas.


    I can thank you now for this edition of your poems—I have not yet
    taken to read it, though—for it does not, each volume of it, open
    obediently to a thought, here, and here, and here, like my green books
    ... no, my Sister's they are; so these you give me are really mine.
    And America, with its ten per cent., shall have my better word
    henceforth and for ever ... for when you calculate, there must have
    been a really extraordinary circulation; and in a few months: it is
    what newspapers call 'a great fact.' Have they reprinted the
    'Seraphim'? Quietly, perhaps!


    I shall see you on Monday, then—


    And my all-important headaches are tolerably kept under—headaches
    proper they are not—but the noise and slight turning are less
    troublesome—will soon go altogether.

Bless you ever—ever dearest friend.
R.B.


    Oh, oh, oh! As many thanks for that precious card-box and jewel of
    a flower-holder as are consistent with my dismay at finding you only
    return them ... and not the costly brown paper wrappages also ... to
    say nothing of the inestimable pins with which my sister uses to
    fasten the same!


