
Tuesday.
[Post-mark, September 9, 1845.]


    One reason against printing the tragedies now, is your not being well
    enough for the necessary work connected with them, ... a sure reason
    and strong ... nay, chiefest of all. Plainly you are unfit for work
    now—and even to complete the preparation of the lyrics, and take them
    through the press, may be too much for you, I am afraid; and if so,
    why you will not do it—will you?—you will wait for another year,—or
    at least be satisfied for this, with bringing out a number of the old
    size, consisting of such poems as are fairly finished and require no
    retouching. 'Saul' for instance, you might leave—! You will not let
    me hear when I am gone, of your being ill—you will take care ... will
    you not? Because you see ... or rather I see ... you are not
    looking well at all—no, you are not! and even if you do not care for
    that, you should and must care to consider how unavailing it will be
    for you to hold those golden keys of the future with a more resolute
    hand than your contemporaries, should you suffer yourself to be struck
    down before the gate ... should you lose the physical power while
    keeping the heart and will. Heart and will are great things, and
    sufficient things in your case—but after all we carry a barrow-full
    of clay about with us, and we must carry it a little carefully if we
    mean to keep to the path and not run zigzag into the border of the
    garden. A figure which reminds me ... and I wanted no figure to remind
    me ... to ask you to thank your sister for me and from me for all her
    kindness about the flowers. Now you will not forget? you must not.
    When I think of the repeated trouble she has taken week after week,
    and all for a stranger, I must think again that it has been very
    kind—and I take the liberty of saying so moreover ... as I am not
    thanking you. Also these flowers of yesterday, which yesterday you
    disdained so, look full of summer and are full of fragrance, and when
    they seem to say that it is not September, I am willing to be lied to
    just so. For I wish it were not September. I wish it were July ...
    or November ... two months before or after: and that this journey were
    thrown behind or in front ... anywhere to be out of sight. You do not
    know the courage it requires to hold the intention of it fast through
    what I feel sometimes. If it (the courage) had been prophesied to me
    only a year ago, the prophet would have been laughed to scorn.
    Well!—but I want you to see. George's letter, and how he and Mrs.
    Hedley, when she saw Papa's note of consent to me, give unhesitating
    counsel. Burn it when you have read it. It is addressed to me ...
    which you will doubt from the address of it perhaps ... seeing that it
    goes βα ... ρβαριζων. We are famous in this house for what
    are called nick-names ... though a few of us have escaped rather by a
    caprice than a reason: and I am never called anything else (never at
    all) except by the nom de paix which you find written in the
    letter:—proving as Mr. Kenyon says, that I am just 'half a Ba-by' ...
    no more nor less;—and in fact the name has that precise definition.
    Burn the note when you have read it.


    And then I take it into my head, as you do not distinguish my sisters,
    you say, one from the other, to send you my own account of them in
    these enclosed 'sonnets' which were written a few weeks ago, and
    though only pretending to be 'sketches,' pretend to be like, as far as
    they go, and are like—my brothers thought—when I 'showed them
    against' a profile drawn in pencil by Alfred, on the same subjects. I
    was laughing and maintaining that mine should be as like as his—and
    he yielded the point to me. So it is mere portrait-painting—and you
    who are in 'high art,' must not be too scornful. Henrietta is the
    elder, and the one who brought you into this room first—and Arabel,
    who means to go with me to Pisa, has been the most with me through my
    illness and is the least wanted in the house here, ... and perhaps ...
    perhaps—is my favourite—though my heart smites me while I write that
    unlawful word. They are both affectionate and kind to me in all
    things, and good and lovable in their own beings—very unlike, for the
    rest; one, most caring for the Polka, ... and the other for the sermon
    preached at Paddington Chapel, ... that is Arabel ... so if ever you
    happen to know her you must try not to say before her how 'much you
    hate &c.' Henrietta always 'managed' everything in the house even
    before I was ill, ... because she liked it and I didn't, and I waived
    my right to the sceptre of dinner-ordering.


    I have been thinking much of your 'Sordello' since you spoke of
    it—and even, I had thought much of it before you spoke of it
    yesterday; feeling that it might be thrown out into the light by your
    hand, and greatly justify the additional effort. It is like a noble
    picture with its face to the wall just now—or at least, in the
    shadow. And so worthy as it is of you in all ways! individual all
    through: you have made even the darkness of it! And such a work as
    it might become if you chose ... if you put your will to it! What I
    meant to say yesterday was not that it wanted more additional verses
    than the 'ten per cent' you spoke of ... though it does perhaps ... so
    much as that (to my mind) it wants drawing together and fortifying in
    the connections and associations ... which hang as loosely every here
    and there, as those in a dream, and confound the reader who persists
    in thinking himself awake.


    How do you mean that I am 'lenient'? Do you not believe that I tell
    you what I think, and as I think it? I may think wrong, to be
    sure—but that is not my fault:—and so there is no use reproaching
    me generally, unless you can convict me definitely at the same
    time:—is there, now?


    And I have been reading and admiring these letters of Mr. Carlyle, and
    receiving the greatest pleasure from them in every way. He is greatly
    himself always—which is the hardest thing for a man to be, perhaps.
    And what his appreciation of you is, it is easy to see—and what he
    expects from you—notwithstanding that prodigious advice of his, to
    write your next work in prose! Also Mrs. Carlyle's letter—thank you
    for letting me see it. I admire that too! It is as ingenious 'a
    case' against poor Keats, as could well be drawn—but nobody who knew
    very deeply what poetry is, could, you know, draw any case against
    him. A poet of the senses, he may be and is, just as she says—but
    then it is of the senses idealized; and no dream in a 'store-room'
    would ever be like the 'Eve of St. Agnes,' unless dreamed by some
    'animosus infans,' like Keats himself. Still it is all true ... isn't
    it?... what she observes of the want of thought as thought. He was a
    seer strictly speaking. And what noble oppositions—(to go back to
    Carlyle's letters) ... he writes to the things you were speaking of
    yesterday! These letters are as good as Milton's picture for
    convicting and putting to shame. Is not the difference between the men
    of our day and 'the giants which were on the earth,' less ... far less
    ... in the faculty ... in the gift, ... or in the general intellect,
    ... than in the stature of the soul itself? Our inferiority is not in
    what we can do, but in what we are. We should write poems like Milton
    if [we] lived them like Milton.


    I write all this just to show, I suppose, that I am not industrious as
    you did me the honour of apprehending that I was going to be ...
    packing trunks perhaps ... or what else in the way of 'active
    usefulness.'


    Say how you are—will you? And do take care, and walk and do what is
    good for you. I shall be able to see you twice before I go. And oh,
    this going! Pray for me, dearest friend. May God bless you.

E.B.B.


