
Saturday Morning.
[Post-mark, September 13, 1845.]


    Now, dearest, I will try and write the little I shall be able, in
    reply to your letter of last week—and first of all I have to entreat
    you, now more than ever, to help me and understand from the few words
    the feelings behind them—(should speak rather more easily, I
    think—but I dare not run the risk: and I know, after all, you will be
    just and kind where you can.) I have read your letter again and
    again. I will tell you—no, not you, but any imaginary other person,
    who should hear what I am going to avow; I would tell that person most
    sincerely there is not a particle of fatuity, shall I call it, in that
    avowal; cannot be, seeing that from the beginning and at this moment I
    never dreamed of winning your love. I can hardly write this word, so
    incongruous and impossible does it seem; such a change of our places
    does it imply—nor, next to that, though long after, would I, if I
    could, supplant one of any of the affections that I know to have
    taken root in you—that great and solemn one, for instance. I feel
    that if I could get myself remade, as if turned to gold, I would not
    even then desire to become more than the mere setting to that
    diamond you must always wear. The regard and esteem you now give me,
    in this letter, and which I press to my heart and bow my head upon, is
    all I can take and all too embarrassing, using all my gratitude. And
    yet, with that contented pride in being infinitely your debtor as it
    is, bound to you for ever as it is; when I read your letter with all
    the determination to be just to us both; I dare not so far withstand
    the light I am master of, as to refuse seeing that whatever is
    recorded as an objection to your disposing of that life of mine I
    would give you, has reference to some supposed good in that life which
    your accepting it would destroy (of which fancy I shall speak
    presently)—I say, wonder as I may at this, I cannot but find it
    there, surely there. I could no more 'bind you by words,' than you
    have bound me, as you say—but if I misunderstand you, one assurance
    to that effect will be but too intelligible to me—but, as it is, I
    have difficulty in imagining that while one of so many reasons, which
    I am not obliged to repeat to myself, but which any one easily
    conceives; while any one of those reasons would impose silence on me
    for ever (for, as I observed, I love you as you now are, and would
    not remove one affection that is already part of you,)—would you,
    being able to speak so, only say that you desire not to put 'more
    sadness than I was born to,' into my life?—that you 'could give me
    only what it were ungenerous to give'?


    Have I your meaning here? In so many words, is it on my account that
    you bid me 'leave this subject'? I think if it were so, I would for
    once call my advantages round me. I am not what your generous
    self-forgetting appreciation would sometimes make me out—but it is
    not since yesterday, nor ten nor twenty years before, that I began to
    look into my own life, and study its end, and requirements, what would
    turn to its good or its loss—and I know, if one may know anything,
    that to make that life yours and increase it by union with yours,
    would render me supremely happy, as I said, and say, and feel. My
    whole suit to you is, in that sense, selfish—not that I am ignorant
    that your nature would most surely attain happiness in being
    conscious that it made another happy—but that best, best end of
    all, would, like the rest, come from yourself, be a reflection of
    your own gift.


    Dearest, I will end here—words, persuasion, arguments, if they were
    at my service I would not use them—I believe in you, altogether have
    faith in you—in you. I will not think of insulting by trying to
    reassure you on one point which certain phrases in your letter might
    at first glance seem to imply—you do not understand me to be living
    and labouring and writing (and not writing) in order to be
    successful in the world's sense? I even convinced the people here
    what was my true 'honourable position in society,' &c. &c. therefore I
    shall not have to inform you that I desire to be very rich, very
    great; but not in reading Law gratis with dear foolish old Basil
    Montagu, as he ever and anon bothers me to do;—much less—enough of
    this nonsense.


    'Tell me what I have a claim to hear': I can hear it, and be as
    grateful as I was before and am now—your friendship is my pride and
    happiness. If you told me your love was bestowed elsewhere, and that
    it was in my power to serve you there, to serve you there would
    still be my pride and happiness. I look on and on over the prospect of
    my love, it is all onwards—and all possible forms of unkindness ...
    I quite laugh to think how they are behind ... cannot be encountered
    in the route we are travelling! I submit to you and will obey you
    implicitly—obey what I am able to conceive of your least desire, much
    more of your expressed wish. But it was necessary to make this avowal,
    among other reasons, for one which the world would recognize too. My
    whole scheme of life (with its wants, material wants at least, closely
    cut down) was long ago calculated—and it supposed you, the finding
    such an one as you, utterly impossible—because in calculating one
    goes upon chances, not on providence—how could I expect you? So for
    my own future way in the world I have always refused to care—any one
    who can live a couple of years and more on bread and potatoes as I did
    once on a time, and who prefers a blouse and a blue shirt (such as I
    now write in) to all manner of dress and gentlemanly appointment, and
    who can, if necessary, groom a horse not so badly, or at all events
    would rather do it all day long than succeed Mr. Fitzroy Kelly in the
    Solicitor-Generalship,—such an one need not very much concern himself
    beyond considering the lilies how they grow. But now I see you near
    this life, all changes—and at a word, I will do all that ought to be
    done, that every one used to say could be done, and let 'all my powers
    find sweet employ' as Dr. Watts sings, in getting whatever is to be
    got—not very much, surely. I would print these things, get them away,
    and do this now, and go to you at Pisa with the news—at Pisa where
    one may live for some £100 a year—while, lo, I seem to remember, I
    do remember, that Charles Kean offered to give me 500 of those
    pounds for any play that might suit him—to say nothing of Mr. Colburn
    saying confidentially that he wanted more than his dinner 'a novel on
    the subject of Napoleon'! So may one make money, if one does not
    live in a house in a row, and feel impelled to take the Princess's
    Theatre for a laudable development and exhibition of one's faculty.


    Take the sense of all this, I beseech you, dearest—all you shall say
    will be best—I am yours—


    Yes, Yours ever. God bless you for all you have been, and are, and
    will certainly be to me, come what He shall please!

R.B.


