
[Post-mark, September 16, 1845.]


    I scarcely know how to write what is to be written nor indeed why it
    is to be written and to what end. I have tried in vain—and you are
    waiting to hear from me. I am unhappy enough even where I am
    happy—but ungrateful nowhere—and I thank you from my
    heart—profoundly from the depths of my heart ... which is nearly all
    I can do.


    One letter I began to write and asked in it how it could become me to
    speak at all if 'from the beginning and at this moment you never
    dreamed of' ... and there, I stopped and tore the paper; because I
    felt that you were too loyal and generous, for me to bear to take a
    moment's advantage of the same, and bend down the very flowering
    branch of your generosity (as it might be) to thicken a little the
    fence of a woman's caution and reserve. You will not say that you have
    not acted as if you 'dreamed'—and I will answer therefore to the
    general sense of your letter and former letters, and admit at once
    that I did state to you the difficulties most difficult to myself
    ... though not all ... and that if I had been worthier of you I should
    have been proportionably less in haste to 'bid you leave that
    subject.' I do not understand how you can seem at the same moment to
    have faith in my integrity and to have doubt whether all this time I
    may not have felt a preference for another ... which you are ready
    'to serve,' you say. Which is generous in you—but in me, where were
    the integrity? Could you really hold me to be blameless, and do you
    think that truehearted women act usually so? Can it be necessary for
    me to tell you that I could not have acted so, and did not? And shall
    I shrink from telling you besides ... you, who have been generous to
    me and have a right to hear it ... and have spoken to me in the name
    of an affection and memory most precious and holy to me, in this same
    letter ... that neither now nor formerly has any man been to my
    feelings what you are ... and that if I were different in some
    respects and free in others by the providence of God, I would accept
    the great trust of your happiness, gladly, proudly, and gratefully;
    and give away my own life and soul to that end. I would do it ...
    not, I do ... observe! it is a truth without a consequence; only
    meaning that I am not all stone—only proving that I am not likely to
    consent to help you in wrong against yourself. You see in me what is
    not:—that, I know: and you overlook in me what is unsuitable to you
    ... that I know, and have sometimes told you. Still, because a
    strong feeling from some sources is self-vindicating and ennobling to
    the object of it, I will not say that, if it were proved to me that
    you felt this for me, I would persist in putting the sense of my own
    unworthiness between you and me—not being heroic, you know, nor
    pretending to be so. But something worse than even a sense of
    unworthiness, God has put between us! and judge yourself if to beat
    your thoughts against the immovable marble of it, can be anything but
    pain and vexation of spirit, waste and wear of spirit to you ...
    judge! The present is here to be seen ... speaking for itself! and the
    best future you can imagine for me, what a precarious thing it must be
    ... a thing for making burdens out of ... only not for your carrying,
    as I have vowed to my own soul. As dear Mr. Kenyon said to me to-day
    in his smiling kindness ... 'In ten years you may be strong
    perhaps'—or 'almost strong'! that being the encouragement of my best
    friends! What would he say, do you think, if he could know or
    guess...! what could he say but that you were ... a poet!—and I ...
    still worse! Never let him know or guess!


    And so if you are wise and would be happy (and you have excellent
    practical sense after all and should exercise it) you must leave
    me—these thoughts of me, I mean ... for if we might not be true
    friends for ever, I should have less courage to say the other truth.
    But we may be friends always ... and cannot be so separated, that your
    happiness, in the knowledge of it, will not increase mine. And if you
    will be persuaded by me, as you say, you will be persuaded thus ...
    and consent to take a resolution and force your mind at once into
    another channel. Perhaps I might bring you reasons of the class which
    you tell me 'would silence you for ever.' I might certainly tell you
    that my own father, if he knew that you had written to me so, and
    that I had answered you—so, even, would not forgive me at the end
    of ten years—and this, from none of the causes mentioned by me here
    and in no disrespect to your name and your position ... though he does
    not over-value poetry even in his daughter, and is apt to take the
    world's measures of the means of life ... but for the singular reason
    that he never does tolerate in his family (sons or daughters) the
    development of one class of feelings. Such an objection I could not
    bring to you of my own will—it rang hollow in my ears—perhaps I
    thought even too little of it:—and I brought to you what I thought
    much of, and cannot cease to think much of equally. Worldly thoughts,
    these are not at all, nor have been: there need be no soiling of the
    heart with any such:—and I will say, in reply to some words of yours,
    that you cannot despise the gold and gauds of the world more than I
    do, and should do even if I found a use for them. And if I wished to
    be very poor, in the world's sense of poverty, I could not, with
    three or four hundred a year of which no living will can dispossess
    me. And is it not the chief good of money, the being free from the
    need of thinking of it? It seems so to me.


    The obstacles then are of another character, and the stronger for
    being so. Believe that I am grateful to you—how grateful, cannot be
    shown in words nor even in tears ... grateful enough to be truthful in
    all ways. You know I might have hidden myself from you—but I would
    not: and by the truth told of myself, you may believe in the
    earnestness with which I tell the other truths—of you ... and of this
    subject. The subject will not bear consideration—it breaks in our
    hands. But that God is stronger than we, cannot be a bitter thought to
    you but a holy thought ... while He lets me, as much as I can be
    anyone's, be only yours.

E.B.B.


