
[Post-mark, September 17, 1845.]


    I do not know whether you imagine the precise effect of your letter on
    me—very likely you do, and write it just for that—for I conceive
    all from your goodness. But before I tell you what is that effect,
    let me say in as few words as possible what shall stop any
    fear—though only for a moment and on the outset—that you have been
    misunderstood, that the goodness outside, and round and over all,
    hides all or any thing. I understand you to signify to me that you
    see, at this present, insurmountable obstacles to that—can I speak
    it—entire gift, which I shall own, was, while I dared ask it, above
    my hopes—and wishes, even, so it seems to me ... and yet could not
    but be asked, so plainly was it dictated to me, by something quite out
    of those hopes and wishes. Will it help me to say that once in this
    Aladdin-cavern I knew I ought to stop for no heaps of jewel-fruit on
    the trees from the very beginning, but go on to the lamp, the prize,
    the last and best of all? Well, I understand you to pronounce that at
    present you believe this gift impossible—and I acquiesce entirely—I
    submit wholly to you; repose on you in all the faith of which I am
    capable. Those obstacles are solely for you to see and to declare
    ... had I seen them, be sure I should never have mocked you or
    myself by affecting to pass them over ... what were obstacles, I
    mean: but you do see them, I must think,—and perhaps they strike me
    the more from my true, honest unfeigned inability to imagine what they
    are,—not that I shall endeavour. After what you also apprise me of,
    I know and am joyfully confident that if ever they cease to be what
    you now consider them, you who see now for me, whom I implicitly
    trust in to see for me; you will then, too, see and remember me, and
    how I trust, and shall then be still trusting. And until you so see,
    and so inform me, I shall never utter a word—for that would involve
    the vilest of implications. I thank God—I do thank him, that in
    this whole matter I have been, to the utmost of my power, not unworthy
    of his introducing you to me, in this respect that, being no longer in
    the first freshness of life, and having for many years now made up my
    mind to the impossibility of loving any woman ... having wondered at
    this in the beginning, and fought not a little against it, having
    acquiesced in it at last, and accounted for it all to myself, and
    become, if anything, rather proud of it than sorry ... I say, when
    real love, making itself at once recognized as such, did reveal
    itself to me at last, I did open my heart to it with a cry—nor care
    for its overturning all my theory—nor mistrust its effect upon a mind
    set in ultimate order, so I fancied, for the few years more—nor
    apprehend in the least that the new element would harm what was
    already organized without its help. Nor have I, either, been guilty of
    the more pardonable folly, of treating the new feeling after the
    pedantic fashions and instances of the world. I have not spoken when
    it did not speak, because 'one' might speak, or has spoken, or
    should speak, and 'plead' and all that miserable work which, after
    all, I may well continue proud that I am not called to attempt. Here
    for instance, now ... 'one' should despair; but 'try again' first,
    and work blindly at removing those obstacles (—if I saw them, I
    should be silent, and only speak when a month hence, ten years hence,
    I could bid you look where they were)—and 'one' would do all this,
    not for the play-acting's sake, or to 'look the character' ...
    (that would be something quite different from folly ...) but from a
    not unreasonable anxiety lest by too sudden a silence, too complete an
    acceptance of your will; the earnestness and endurance and
    unabatedness ... the truth, in fact, of what had already been
    professed, should get to be questioned—But I believe that you believe
    me—And now that all is clear between us I will say, what you will
    hear, without fearing for me or yourself, that I am utterly contented
    ... ('grateful' I have done with ... it must go—) I accept what you
    give me, what those words deliver to me, as—not all I asked for ...
    as I said ... but as more than I ever hoped for,—all, in the best
    sense, that I deserve. That phrase in my letter which you objected to,
    and the other—may stand, too—I never attempted to declare, describe
    my feeling for you—one word of course stood for it all ... but having
    to put down some one point, so to speak, of it—you could not wonder
    if I took any extreme one first ... never minding all the untold
    portion that led up to it, made it possible and natural—it is true,
    'I could not dream of that'—that I was eager to get the horrible
    notion away from never so flitting a visit to you, that you were thus
    and thus to me on condition of my proving just the same to you—just
    as if we had waited to acknowledge that the moon lighted us till we
    ascertained within these two or three hundred years that the earth
    happens to light the moon as well! But I felt that, and so said
    it:—now you have declared what I should never have presumed to
    hope—and I repeat to you that I, with all to be thankful for to God,
    am most of all thankful for this the last of his providences ... which
    is no doubt, the natural and inevitable feeling, could one always see
    clearly. Your regard for me is all success—let the rest come, or
    not come. In my heart's thankfulness I would ... I am sure I would
    promise anything that would gratify you ... but it would not do
    that, to agree, in words, to change my affections, put them elsewhere
    &c. &c. That would be pure foolish talking, and quite foreign to the
    practical results which you will attain in a better way from a higher
    motive. I will cheerfully promise you, however, to be 'bound by no
    words,' blind to no miracle; in sober earnest, it is not because I
    renounced once for all oxen and the owning and having to do with them,
    that I will obstinately turn away from any unicorn when such an
    apparition blesses me ... but meantime I shall walk at peace on our
    hills here nor go looking in all corners for the bright curved horn!
    And as for you ... if I did not dare 'to dream of that'—, now it is
    mine, my pride and joy prevent in no manner my taking the whole
    consolation of it at once, now—I will be confident that, if I obey
    you, I shall get no wrong for it—if, endeavouring to spare you
    fruitless pain, I do not eternally revert to the subject; do indeed
    'quit' it just now, when no good can come of dwelling on it to you;
    you will never say to yourself—so I said—'the "generous impulse"
    has worn itself out ... time is doing his usual work—this was to be
    expected' &c. &c. You will be the first to say to me 'such an obstacle
    has ceased to exist ... or is now become one palpable to you, one
    you may try and overcome'—and I shall be there, and ready—ten
    years hence as now—if alive.


    One final word on the other matters—the 'worldly matters'—I shall
    own I alluded to them rather ostentatiously, because—because that
    would be the one poor sacrifice I could make you—one I would
    cheerfully make, but a sacrifice, and the only one: this careless
    'sweet habitude of living'—this absolute independence of mine, which,
    if I had it not, my heart would starve and die for, I feel, and which
    I have fought so many good battles to preserve—for that has
    happened, too—this light rational life I lead, and know so well that
    I lead; this I could give up for nothing less than—what you know—but
    I would give it up, not for you merely, but for those whose
    disappointment might re-act on you—and I should break no promise to
    myself—the money getting would not be for the sake of it; 'the
    labour not for that which is nought'—indeed the necessity of doing
    this, if at all, now, was one of the reasons which make me go on to
    that last request of all—at once; one must not be too old, they
    say, to begin their ways. But, in spite of all the babble, I feel sure
    that whenever I make up my mind to that, I can be rich enough and to
    spare—because along with what you have thought genius in me, is
    certainly talent, what the world recognizes as such; and I have tried
    it in various ways, just to be sure that I was a little magnanimous
    in never intending to use it. Thus, in more than one of the reviews
    and newspapers that laughed my 'Paracelsus' to scorn ten years ago—in
    the same column, often, of these reviews, would follow a most
    laudatory notice of an Elementary French book, on a new plan, which I
    'did' for my old French master, and he published—'that was really
    an useful work'!—So that when the only obstacle is only that there is
    so much per annum to be producible, you will tell me. After all it
    would be unfair in me not to confess that this was always intended to
    be my own single stipulation—'an objection' which I could see,
    certainly,—but meant to treat myself to the little luxury of
    removing.


    So, now, dearest—let me once think of that, and of you as my own, my
    dearest—this once—dearest, I have done with words for the present. I
    will wait. God bless you and reward you—I kiss your hands now. This
    is my comfort, that if you accept my feeling as all but unexpressed
    now, more and more will become spoken—or understood, that is—we both
    live on—you will know better what it was, how much and manifold,
    what one little word had to give out.

God bless you—
Your R.B.


    On Thursday,—you remember?


    This is Tuesday Night—


    I called on Saturday at the Office in St. Mary Axe—all uncertainty
    about the vessel's sailing again for Leghorn—it could not sail before
    the middle of the month—and only then if &c. But if I would leave
    my card &c. &c.


