
Wednesday Morning.
[Post-mark, September 17, 1845.]


    I write one word just to say that it is all over with Pisa; which was
    a probable evil when I wrote last, and which I foresaw from the
    beginning—being a prophetess, you know. I cannot tell you now how it
    has all happened—only do not blame me, for I have kept my ground to
    the last, and only yield when Mr. Kenyon and all the world see that
    there is no standing. I am ashamed almost of having put so much
    earnestness into a personal matter—and I spoke face to face and quite
    firmly—so as to pass with my sisters for the 'bravest person in the
    house' without contestation.


    Sometimes it seems to me as if it could not end so—I mean, that the
    responsibility of such a negative must be reconsidered ... and you see
    how Mr. Kenyon writes to me. Still, as the matter lies, ... no Pisa!
    And, as I said before, my prophetic instincts are not likely to fail,
    such as they have been from the beginning.


    If you wish to come, it must not be until Saturday at soonest. I have
    a headache and am weary at heart with all this vexation—and besides
    there is no haste now: and when you do come, if you do, I will trust
    to you not to recur to one subject, which must lie where it fell ...
    must! I had begun to write to you on Saturday, to say how I had
    forgotten to give you your MSS. which were lying ready for you ... the
    Hood poems. Would it not be desirable that you made haste to see
    them through the press, and went abroad with your Roman friends at
    once, to try to get rid of that uneasiness in the head? Do think of
    it—and more than think.


    For me, you are not to fancy me unwell. Only, not to be worn a little
    with the last week's turmoil, were impossible—and Mr. Kenyon said to
    me yesterday that he quite wondered how I could bear it at all, do
    anything reasonable at all, and confine my misdoings to sending
    letters addressed to him at Brighton, when he was at Dover! If
    anything changes, you shall hear from—

E.B.B.


    Mr. Kenyon returns to Dover immediately. His kindness is impotent in
    the case.


