
Thursday Morning.
[Post-mark, September 18, 1845.]


    But you, too, will surely want, if you think me a rational creature,
    my explanation—without which all that I have said and done would be
    pure madness, I think. It is just 'what I see' that I do see,—or
    rather it has proved, since I first visited you, that the reality was
    infinitely worse than I know it to be ... for at, and after the
    writing of that first letter, on my first visit, I believed—through
    some silly or misapprehended talk, collected at second hand too—that
    your complaint was of quite another nature—a spinal injury
    irremediable in the nature of it. Had it been so—now speak for
    me, for what you hope I am, and say how that should affect or
    neutralize what you were, what I wished to associate with myself in
    you? But as you now are:—then if I had married you seven years ago,
    and this visitation came now first, I should be 'fulfilling a pious
    duty,' I suppose, in enduring what could not be amended—a pattern to
    good people in not running away ... for where were now the use and
    the good and the profit and—


    I desire in this life (with very little fluctuation for a man and too
    weak a one) to live and just write out certain things which are in me,
    and so save my soul. I would endeavour to do this if I were forced to
    'live among lions' as you once said—but I should best do this if I
    lived quietly with myself and with you. That you cannot dance like
    Cerito does not materially disarrange this plan—nor that I might
    (beside the perpetual incentive and sustainment and consolation) get,
    over and above the main reward, the incidental, particular and
    unexpected happiness of being allowed when not working to rather
    occupy myself with watching you, than with certain other pursuits I
    might be otherwise addicted to—this, also, does not constitute an
    obstacle, as I see obstacles.


    But you see them—and I see you, and know my first duty and do it
    resolutely if not cheerfully.


    As for referring again, till leave by word or letter—you will see—


    And very likely, the tone of this letter even will be
    misunderstood—because I studiously cut out all vain words, protesting
    &c.:—No—will it?


    I said, unadvisedly, that Saturday was taken from me ... but it was
    dark and I had not looked at the tickets: the hour of the performance
    is later than I thought. If to-morrow does not suit you, as I infer,
    let it be Saturday—at 3—and I will leave earlier, a little, and all
    will be quite right here. One hint will apprise me.

God bless you, dearest friend.
R.B.


    Something else just heard, makes me reluctantly strike out
    Saturday—


    Monday then?


