
[Post-mark, September 24, 1845.]


    I have nothing to say about Pisa, ... but a great deal (if I could say
    it) about you, who do what is wrong by your own confession and are
    ill because of it and make people uneasy—now is it right
    altogether? is it right to do wrong?... for it comes to that:—and
    is it kind to do so much wrong?... for it comes almost to that
    besides. Ah—you should not indeed! I seem to see quite plainly that
    you will be ill in a serious way, if you do not take care and take
    exercise; and so you must consent to be teazed a little into taking
    both. And if you will not take them here ... or not so effectually as
    in other places; why not go with your Italian friends? Have you
    thought of it at all? I have been thinking since yesterday that it
    might be best for you to go at once, now that the probability has
    turned quite against me. If I were going, I should ask you not to do
    so immediately ... but you see how unlikely it is!—although I mean
    still to speak my whole thoughts—I will do that ... even though
    for the mere purpose of self-satisfaction. George came last night—but
    there is an adverse star this morning, and neither of us has the
    opportunity necessary. Only both he and I will speak—that is
    certain. And Arabel had the kindness to say yesterday that if I liked
    to go, she would go with me at whatever hazard—which is very
    kind—but you know I could not—it would not be right of me. And
    perhaps after all we may gain the point lawfully; and if not ... at
    the worst ... the winter may be warm (it is better to fall into the
    hands of God, as the Jew said) and I may lose less strength than
    usual, ... having more than usual to lose ... and altogether it may
    not be so bad an alternative. As to being the cause of any anger
    against my sister, you would not advise me into such a position, I am
    sure—it would be untenable for one moment.


    But you ... in that case, ... would it not be good for your head if
    you went at once? I praise myself for saying so to you—yet if it
    really is good for you, I don't deserve the praising at all. And how
    was it on Saturday—that question I did not ask yesterday—with Ben
    Jonson and the amateurs? I thought of you at the time—I mean, on that
    Saturday evening, nevertheless.


    You shall hear when there is any more to say. May God bless you,
    dearest friend! I am ever yours,

E.B.B.


