
Wednesday Evening.
[Post-mark, September 25, 1845.]


    I walked to town, this morning, and back again—so that when I found
    your note on my return, and knew what you had been enjoining me in the
    way of exercise, I seemed as if I knew, too, why that energetic fit
    had possessed me and why I succumbed to it so readily. You shall never
    have to intimate twice to me that such an insignificant thing, even,
    as the taking exercise should be done. Besides, I have many motives
    now for wishing to continue well. But Italy just now—Oh, no! My
    friends would go through Pisa, too.


    On that subject I must not speak. And you have 'more strength to
    lose,' and are so well, evidently so well; that is, so much better, so
    sure to be still better—can it be that you will not go!


    Here are your new notes on my verses. Where are my words for the
    thanks? But you know what I feel, and shall feel—ever feel—for these
    and for all. The notes would be beyond price to me if they came from
    some dear Phemius of a teacher—but from you!


    The Theatricals 'went off' with great éclat, and the performance was
    really good, really clever or better. Forster's 'Kitely' was very
    emphatic and earnest, and grew into great interest, quite up to the
    poet's allotted tether, which is none of the longest. He pitched the
    character's key note too gravely, I thought; beginning with
    certainty, rather than mere suspicion, of evil. Dickens' 'Bobadil'
    was capital—with perhaps a little too much of the consciousness of
    entire cowardice ... which I don't so willingly attribute to the noble
    would-be pacificator of Europe, besieger of Strigonium &c.—but the
    end of it all was really pathetic, as it should be, for Bobadil is
    only too clever for the company of fools he makes wonderment for:
    having once the misfortune to relish their society, and to need but
    too pressingly their 'tobacco-money,' what can he do but suit himself
    to their capacities?—And D. Jerrold was very amusing and clever in
    his 'Country Gull'—And Mr. Leech superb in the Town Master Mathew.
    All were good, indeed, and were voted good, and called on, and cheered
    off, and praised heartily behind their backs and before the curtain.
    Stanfield's function had exercise solely in the touching up (very
    effectively) sundry 'Scenes'—painted scenes—and the dresses, which
    were perfect, had the advantage of Mr. Maclise's experience. And—all
    is told!


    And now; I shall hear, you promise me, if anything occurs—with what
    feeling, I wait and hope, you know. If there is no best of reasons
    against it, Saturday, you remember, is my day—This fine weather, too!

May God bless my dearest friend—
Ever yours
R.B.


