
 [Post-mark, September 25, 1845.]


    I have spoken again, and the result is that we are in precisely the
    same position; only with bitterer feelings on one side. If I go or
    stay they must be bitter: words have been said that I cannot easily
    forget, nor remember without pain; and yet I really do almost smile in
    the midst of it all, to think how I was treated this morning as an
    undutiful daughter because I tried to put on my gloves ... for there
    was no worse provocation. At least he complained of the undutifulness
    and rebellion (!!!) of everyone in the house—and when I asked if he
    meant that reproach for me, the answer was that he meant it for all
    of us, one with another. And I could not get an answer. He would not
    even grant me the consolation of thinking that I sacrificed what I
    supposed to be good, to him. I told him that my prospects of health
    seemed to me to depend on taking this step, but that through my
    affection for him, I was ready to sacrifice those to his pleasure if
    he exacted it—only it was necessary to my self-satisfaction in future
    years, to understand definitely that the sacrifice was exacted by
    him and was made to him, ... and not thrown away blindly and by a
    misapprehension. And he would not answer that. I might do my own
    way, he said—he would not speak—he would not say that he was not
    displeased with me, nor the contrary:—I had better do what I
    liked:—for his part, he washed his hands of me altogether.


    And so I have been very wise—witness how my eyes are swelled with
    annotations and reflections on all this! The best of it is that now
    George himself admits I can do no more in the way of speaking, ... I
    have no spell for charming the dragons, ... and allows me to be
    passive and enjoins me to be tranquil, and not 'make up my mind' to
    any dreadful exertion for the future. Moreover he advises me to go on
    with the preparations for the voyage, and promises to state the case
    himself at the last hour to the 'highest authority'; and judge finally
    whether it be possible for me to go with the necessary companionship.
    And it seems best to go to Malta on the 3rd of October—if at all ...
    from steam-packet reasons ... without excluding Pisa ... remember ...
    by any means.


    Well!—and what do you think? Might it be desirable for me to give up
    the whole? Tell me. I feel aggrieved of course and wounded—and
    whether I go or stay that feeling must last—I cannot help it. But my
    spirits sink altogether at the thought of leaving England so—and
    then I doubt about Arabel and Stormie ... and it seems to me that I
    ought not to mix them up in a business of this kind where the
    advantage is merely personal to myself. On the other side, George
    holds that if I give up and stay even, there will be displeasure just
    the same, ... and that, when once gone, the irritation will exhaust
    and smooth itself away—which however does not touch my chief
    objection. Would it be better ... more right ... to give it up?
    Think for me. Even if I hold on to the last, at the last I shall be
    thrown off—that is my conviction. But ... shall I give up at
    once? Do think for me.


    And I have thought that if you like to come on Friday instead of
    Saturday ... as there is the uncertainty about next week, ... it would
    divide the time more equally: but let it be as you like and according
    to circumstances as you see them. Perhaps you have decided to go at
    once with your friends—who knows? I wish I could know that you were
    better to-day. May God bless you

Ever yours,
E.B.B.


