
[Post-mark, September 25, 1845.]


    You have said to me more than once that you wished I might never know
    certain feelings you had been forced to endure. I suppose all of us
    have the proper place where a blow should fall to be felt most—and I
    truly wish you may never feel what I have to bear in looking on,
    quite powerless, and silent, while you are subjected to this
    treatment, which I refuse to characterize—so blind is it for
    blindness. I think I ought to understand what a father may exact, and
    a child should comply with; and I respect the most ambiguous of love's
    caprices if they give never so slight a clue to their all-justifying
    source. Did I, when you signified to me the probable objections—you
    remember what—to myself, my own happiness,—did I once allude to,
    much less argue against, or refuse to acknowledge those objections?
    For I wholly sympathize, however it go against me, with the highest,
    wariest, pride and love for you, and the proper jealousy and vigilance
    they entail—but now, and here, the jewel is not being over guarded,
    but ruined, cast away. And whoever is privileged to interfere should
    do so in the possessor's own interest—all common sense
    interferes—all rationality against absolute no-reason at all. And you
    ask whether you ought to obey this no-reason? I will tell you: all
    passive obedience and implicit submission of will and intellect is by
    far too easy, if well considered, to be the course prescribed by God
    to Man in this life of probation—for they evade probation
    altogether, though foolish people think otherwise. Chop off your legs,
    you will never go astray; stifle your reason altogether and you will
    find it is difficult to reason ill. 'It is hard to make these
    sacrifices!'—not so hard as to lose the reward or incur the penalty
    of an Eternity to come; 'hard to effect them, then, and go through
    with them'—not hard, when the leg is to be cut off—that it is
    rather harder to keep it quiet on a stool, I know very well. The
    partial indulgence, the proper exercise of one's faculties, there is
    the difficulty and problem for solution, set by that Providence which
    might have made the laws of Religion as indubitable as those of
    vitality, and revealed the articles of belief as certainly as that
    condition, for instance, by which we breathe so many times in a minute
    to support life. But there is no reward proposed for the feat of
    breathing, and a great one for that of believing—consequently there
    must go a great deal more of voluntary effort to this latter than is
    implied in the getting absolutely rid of it at once, by adopting the
    direction of an infallible church, or private judgment of another—for
    all our life is some form of religion, and all our action some belief,
    and there is but one law, however modified, for the greater and the
    less. In your case I do think you are called upon to do your duty to
    yourself; that is, to God in the end. Your own reason should examine
    the whole matter in dispute by every light which can be put in
    requisition; and every interest that appears to be affected by your
    conduct should have its utmost claims considered—your father's in the
    first place; and that interest, not in the miserable limits of a few
    days' pique or whim in which it would seem to express itself; but in
    its whole extent ... the hereafter which all momentary passion
    prevents him seeing ... indeed, the present on either side which
    everyone else must see. And this examination made, with whatever
    earnestness you will, I do think and am sure that on its conclusion
    you should act, in confidence that a duty has been performed ...
    difficult, or how were it a duty? Will it not be infinitely harder
    to act so than to blindly adopt his pleasure, and die under it? Who
    can not do that?


    I fling these hasty rough words over the paper, fast as they will
    fall—knowing to whom I cast them, and that any sense they may contain
    or point to, will be caught and understood, and presented in a better
    light. The hard thing ... this is all I want to say ... is to act on
    one's own best conviction—not to abjure it and accept another will,
    and say 'there is my plain duty'—easy it is, whether plain or no!


    How 'all changes!' When I first knew you—you know what followed. I
    supposed you to labour under an incurable complaint—and, of course,
    to be completely dependent on your father for its commonest
    alleviations; the moment after that inconsiderate letter, I reproached
    myself bitterly with the selfishness apparently involved in any
    proposition I might then have made—for though I have never been at
    all frightened of the world, nor mistrustful of my power to deal with
    it, and get my purpose out of it if once I thought it worth while, yet
    I could not but feel the consideration, of what failure would now
    be, paralyse all effort even in fancy. When you told me lately that
    'you could never be poor'—all my solicitude was at an end—I had but
    myself to care about, and I told you, what I believed and believe,
    that I can at any time amply provide for that, and that I could
    cheerfully and confidently undertake the removing that obstacle. Now
    again the circumstances shift—and you are in what I should wonder at
    as the veriest slavery—and I who could free you from it, I am here
    scarcely daring to write ... though I know you must feel for me and
    forgive what forces itself from me ... what retires so mutely into my
    heart at your least word ... what shall not be again written or
    spoken, if you so will ... that I should be made happy beyond all hope
    of expression by. Now while I dream, let me once dream! I would
    marry you now and thus—I would come when you let me, and go when you
    bade me—I would be no more than one of your brothers—'no
    more'—that is, instead of getting to-morrow for Saturday, I should
    get Saturday as well—two hours for one—when your head ached I
    should be here. I deliberately choose the realization of that dream
    (—of sitting simply by you for an hour every day) rather than any
    other, excluding you, I am able to form for this world, or any world I
    know—And it will continue but a dream.

God bless my dearest E.B.B.
R.B.


    You understand that I see you to-morrow, Friday, as you propose.


    I am better—thank you—and will go out to-day.


    You know what I am, what I would speak, and all I would do.


