
Friday Evening.
[Post-mark, September 27, 1845.]


    I had your letter late last night, everyone almost, being out of the
    house by an accident, so that it was left in the letter-box, and if I
    had wished to answer it before I saw you, it had scarcely been
    possible.


    But it will be the same thing—for you know as well as if you saw my
    answer, what it must be, what it cannot choose but be, on pain of
    sinking me so infinitely below not merely your level but my own, that
    the depth cannot bear a glance down. Yet, though I am not made of such
    clay as to admit of my taking a base advantage of certain noble
    extravagances, (and that I am not I thank God for your sake) I will
    say, I must say, that your words in this letter have done me good and
    made me happy, ... that I thank and bless you for them, ... and that
    to receive such a proof of attachment from you, not only overpowers
    every present evil, but seems to me a full and abundant amends for the
    merely personal sufferings of my whole life. When I had read that
    letter last night I did think so. I looked round and round for the
    small bitternesses which for several days had been bitter to me, and I
    could not find one of them. The tear-marks went away in the moisture
    of new, happy tears. Why, how else could I have felt? how else do you
    think I could? How would any woman have felt ... who could feel at all
    ... hearing such words said (though 'in a dream' indeed) by such a
    speaker?


    And now listen to me in turn. You have touched me more profoundly than
    I thought even you could have touched me—my heart was full when you
    came here to-day. Henceforward I am yours for everything but to do you
    harm—and I am yours too much, in my heart, ever to consent to do you
    harm in that way. If I could consent to do it, not only should I be
    less loyal ... but in one sense, less yours. I say this to you without
    drawback and reserve, because it is all I am able to say, and perhaps
    all I shall be able to say. However this may be, a promise goes to
    you in it that none, except God and your will, shall interpose between
    you and me, ... I mean, that if He should free me within a moderate
    time from the trailing chain of this weakness, I will then be to you
    whatever at that hour you shall choose ... whether friend or more than
    friend ... a friend to the last in any case. So it rests with God and
    with you—only in the meanwhile you are most absolutely free ...
    'unentangled' (as they call it) by the breadth of a thread—and if I
    did not know that you considered yourself so, I would not see you any
    more, let the effort cost me what it might. You may force me feel:
    ... but you cannot force me to think contrary to my first thought
    ... that it were better for you to forget me at once in one relation.
    And if better for you, can it be bad for me? which flings me down
    on the stone-pavement of the logicians.


    And now if I ask a boon of you, will you forget afterwards that it
    ever was asked? I have hesitated a great deal; but my face is down on
    the stone-pavement—no—I will not ask to-day—It shall be for another
    day—and may God bless you on this and on those that come after, my
    dearest friend.


