
Wednesday.
[Post-mark, October 1, 1845.]


    I have read to the last line of your 'Rosicrucian'; and my scepticism
    grew and grew through Hume's process of doubtful doubts, and at last
    rose to the full stature of incredulity ... for I never could believe
    Shelley capable of such a book (call it a book!), not even with a
    flood of boarding-school idiocy dashed in by way of dilution.
    Altogether it roused me to deny myself so far as to look at the date
    of the book, and to get up and travel to the other end of the room to
    confront it with other dates in the 'Letters from Abroad' ... (I, who
    never think of a date except the 'A.D.,' and am inclined every now and
    then to write that down as 1548 ...) well! and on comparing these
    dates in these two volumes before my eyes, I find that your
    Rosicrucian was 'printed for Stockdale' in 1822, and that Shelley
    died in the July of the same year!!—There, is a vindicating fact
    for you! And unless the 'Rosicrucian' went into more editions than
    one, and dates here from a later one, ... which is not ascertainable
    from this fragment of a titlepage, ... the innocence of the great poet
    stands proved—now doesn't it? For nobody will say that he published
    such a book in the last year of his life, in the maturity of his
    genius, and that Godwin's daughter helped him in it! That 'dripping
    dew' from the skeleton is the only living word in the book!—which
    really amused me notwithstanding, from the intense absurdity of the
    whole composition ... descriptions ... sentiments ... and morals.


    Judge yourself if I had not better say 'No' about the cloak! I would
    take it if you wished such a kindness to me—and although you might
    find it very useful to yourself ... or to your mother or sister ...
    still if you wished me to take it I should like to have it, and the
    mantle of the prophet might bring me down something of his spirit! but
    do you remember ... do you consider ... how many talkers there are in
    this house, and what would be talked—or that it is not worth while to
    provoke it all? And Papa, knowing it, would not like it—and
    altogether it is far better, believe me, that you should keep your own
    cloak, and I, the thought of the kindness you meditated in respect to
    it. I have heard nothing more—nothing.


    I was asked the other day by a very young friend of mine ... the
    daughter of an older friend who once followed you up-stairs in this
    house ... Mr. Hunter, an Independent minister ... for 'Mr. Browning's
    autograph.' She wants it for a collection ... for her album—and so,
    will you write out a verse or two on one side of note paper ... not as
    you write for the printers ... and let me keep my promise and send it
    to her? I forgot to ask you before. Or one verse will do ... anything
    will do ... and don't let me be bringing you into vexation. It need
    not be of MS. rarity.


    You are not better ... really ... I fear. And your mother's being ill
    affects you more than you like to admit, I fear besides. Will you,
    when you write, say how both are ... nothing extenuating, you know.
    May God bless you, my dearest friend.

Ever yours,
E.B.B.


