
Thursday.
[Post-mark, October 2, 1845.]


    Well, let us hope against hope in the sad matter of the novel—yet,
    yet,—it is by Shelley, if you will have the truth—as I happen to
    know—proof last being that Leigh Hunt told me he unearthed it in
    Shelley's own library at Marlow once, to the writer's horror and
    shame—'He snatched it out of my hands'—said H. Yet I thrust it into
    yours ... so much for the subtle fence of friends who reach your heart
    by a side-thrust, as I told you on Tuesday, after the enemy has fallen
    back breathless and baffled. As for the date, that Stockdale was a
    notorious pirate and raker-up of rash publications ... and, do you
    know, I suspect the title-page is all that boasts such novelty,—see
    if the book, the inside leaves, be not older evidently!—a common
    trick of the 'trade' to this day. The history of this and 'Justrozzi,'
    as it is spelt,—the other novel,—may be read in Medwin's
    'Conversations'—and, as I have been told, in Lady Ch. Bury's
    'Reminiscences' or whatever she calls them ... the 'Guistrozzi' was
    certainly 'written in concert with'—somebody or other ... for I
    confess the whole story grows monstrous and even the froth of wine
    strings itself in bright bubbles,—ah, but this was the scum of the
    fermenting vat, do you see? I am happy to say I forget the novel
    entirely, or almost—and only keep the exact impression which you have
    gained ... through me! 'The fair cross of gold he dashed on the
    floor'—(that is my pet-line ... because the 'chill dew' of a place
    not commonly supposed to favour humidity is a plagiarism from Lewis's
    'Monk,' it now flashes on me! Yes, Lewis, too, puts the phrase into
    intense italics.) And now, please read a chorus in the 'Prometheus
    Unbound' or a scene from the 'Cenci'—and join company with Shelley
    again!


    —From 'chill dew' I come to the cloak—you are quite right—and I
    give up that fancy. Will you, then, take one more precaution when
    all proper safe-guards have been adopted; and, when everything is
    sure, contrive some one sureness besides, against cold or wind or
    sea-air; and say 'this—for the cloak which is not here, and to help
    the heart's wish which is,'—so I shall be there palpably. Will you
    do this? Tell me you will, to-morrow—and tell me all good news.


    My Mother suffers still.... I hope she is no worse—but a little
    better—certainly better. I am better too, in my unimportant way.


    Now I will write you the verses ... some easy ones out of a paper-full
    meant to go between poem and poem in my next number, and break the
    shock of collision.


    Let me kiss your hand—dearest! My heart and life—all is yours, and
    forever—God make you happy as I am through you—Bless you

R.B.


