
Saturday.
[Post-mark, October 6, 1845.]


    Tuesday is given up in full council. The thing is beyond doubting of,
    as George says and as you thought yesterday. And then George has it in
    his head to beguile the Duke of Palmella out of a smaller cabin, so
    that I might sail from the Thames on the twentieth—and whether he
    succeeds or not, I humbly confess that one of the chief advantages of
    the new plan if not the very chief (as I see it) is just in the
    delay.


    Your spring-song is full of beauty as you know very well—and 'that's
    the wise thrush,' so characteristic of you (and of the thrush too)
    that I was sorely tempted to ask you to write it 'twice over,' ... and
    not send the first copy to Mary Hunter notwithstanding my promise to
    her. And now when you come to print these fragments, would it not be
    well if you were to stoop to the vulgarism of prefixing some word of
    introduction, as other people do, you know, ... a title ... a name?
    You perplex your readers often by casting yourself on their
    intelligence in these things—and although it is true that readers in
    general are stupid and can't understand, it is still more true that
    they are lazy and won't understand ... and they don't catch your point
    of sight at first unless you think it worth while to push them by the
    shoulders and force them into the right place. Now these fragments ...
    you mean to print them with a line between ... and not one word at the
    top of it ... now don't you! And then people will read

Oh, to be in England

and say to themselves ... 'Why who is this? ... who's out of England?'
    Which is an extreme case of course; but you will see what I mean ...
    and often I have observed how some of the very most beautiful of your
    lyrics have suffered just from your disdain of the usual tactics of
    writers in this one respect.


    And you are not better, still—you are worse instead of better ... are
    you not? Tell me—And what can you mean about 'unimportance,' when you
    were worse last week ... this expiring week ... than ever before, by
    your own confession? And now?—And your mother?


    Yes—I promise! And so, ... Elijah will be missed instead of his
    mantle ... which will be a losing contract after all. But it shall be
    as you say. May you be able to say that you are better! God bless you.

Ever yours.


    Never think of the 'White Slave.' I had just taken it up. The trash of
    it is prodigious—far beyond Mr. Smythe. Not that I can settle upon a
    book just now, in all this wind, to judge of it fairly.


