
Wednesday Evening.
[Post-mark, October 8, 1845.]


    Mr. Kenyon never came. My sisters met him in the street, and he had
    been 'detained all day in the city and would certainly be here
    to-morrow,' Wednesday! And so you see what has happened to Wednesday!
    Moreover he may come besides on Thursday, ... I can answer for
    nothing. Only if I do not write and if you find Thursday admissible,
    will you come then? In the case of an obstacle, you shall hear. And it
    is not (in the meantime) my fault—now is it? I have been quite enough
    vexed about it, indeed.


    Did the Monday work work harm to the head, I wonder? I do fear so that
    you won't get through those papers with impunity—especially if the
    plays are to come after ... though ever so 'gently.' And if you are to
    suffer, it would be right to tongue-tie that silver Bell, and leave
    the congregations to their selling of cabbages. Which is
    unphilanthropic of me perhaps, ... ω φιλτατε.


    Be sure that I shall be 'bold' when the time for going comes—and both
    bold and capable of the effort. I am desired to keep to the respirator
    and the cabin for a day or two, while the cold can reach us; and
    midway in the bay of Biscay some change of climate may be felt, they
    say. There is no sort of danger for me; except that I shall stay in
    England. And why is it that I feel to-night more than ever almost, as
    if I should stay in England? Who can tell? I can tell one thing.
    If I stay, it will not be from a failure in my resolution—that
    will not be—shall not be. Yes—and Mr. Kenyon and I agreed the
    other day that there was something of the tigress-nature very
    distinctly cognisable under what he is pleased to call my
    'Ba-lambishness.'


    Then, on Thursday!... unless something happens to Thursday ... and I
    shall write in that case. And I trust to you (as always) to attend to
    your own convenience—just as you may trust to me to remember my own
    'boon.' Ah—you are curious, I think! Which is scarcely wise of
    you—because it may, you know, be the roc's egg after all. But no,
    it isn't—I will say just so much. And besides I did say that it
    was a 'restitution,' which limits the guesses if it does not put an
    end to them. Unguessable, I choose it to be.


    And now I feel as if I should not stay in England. Which is the
    difference between one five minutes and another. May God bless you.

Ever yours,
E.B.B.


