
[Post-mark, October 11, 1845.]


    Dear Mr. Kenyon has been here again, and talking so (in his kindness
    too) about the probabilities as to Pisa being against me ... about all
    depending 'on one throw' and the 'dice being loaded' &c. ... that I
    looked at him aghast as if he looked at the future through the folded
    curtain and was licensed to speak oracles:—and ever since I have been
    out of spirits ... oh, out of spirits—and must write myself back
    again, or try. After all he may be wrong like another—and I should
    tell you that he reasons altogether from the delay ... and that 'the
    cabins will therefore be taken' and the 'circular bills' out of reach!
    He said that one of his purposes in staying in town, was to
    'knout' me every day—didn't he?


    Well—George will probably speak before he leaves town, which will
    be on Monday! and now that the hour approaches, I do feel as if the
    house stood upon gunpowder, and as if I held Guy Fawkes's lantern in
    my right hand. And no: I shall not go. The obstacles will not be those
    of Mr. Kenyon's finding—and what their precise character will be I do
    not see distinctly. Only that they will be sufficient, and thrown by
    one hand just where the wheel should turn, ... that, I see—and you
    will, in a few days.


    Did you go to Moxon's and settle the printing matter? Tell me. And
    what was the use of telling Mr. Kenyon that you were 'quite well' when
    you know you are not? Will you say to me how you are, saying the
    truth? and also how your mother is?


    To show the significance of the omission of those evening or rather
    night visits of Papa's—for they came sometimes at eleven, and
    sometimes at twelve—I will tell you that he used to sit and talk in
    them, and then always kneel and pray with me and for me—which I
    used of course to feel as a proof of very kind and affectionate
    sympathy on his part, and which has proportionably pained me in the
    withdrawing. They were no ordinary visits, you observe, ... and he
    could not well throw me further from him than by ceasing to pay
    them—the thing is quite expressively significant. Not that I pretend
    to complain, nor to have reason to complain. One should not be
    grateful for kindness, only while it lasts: that would be a
    short-breathed gratitude. I just tell you the fact, proving that it
    cannot be accidental.


    Did you ever, ever tire me? Indeed no—you never did. And do
    understand that I am not to be tired 'in that way,' though as Mr. Boyd
    said once of his daughter, one may be so 'far too effeminate.' No—if
    I were put into a crowd I should be tired soon—or, apart from the
    crowd, if you made me discourse orations De Coronâ ... concerning your
    bag even ... I should be tired soon—though peradventure not very much
    sooner than you who heard. But on the smooth ground of quiet
    conversation (particularly when three people don't talk at once as my
    brothers do ... to say the least!) I last for a long while:—not to
    say that I have the pretension of being as good and inexhaustible a
    listener to your own speaking as you could find in the world. So
    please not to accuse me of being tired again. I can't be tired, and
    won't be tired, you see.


    And now, since I began to write this, there is a new evil and
    anxiety—a worse anxiety than any—for one of my brothers is ill; had
    been unwell for some days and we thought nothing of it, till to-day
    Saturday: and the doctors call it a fever of the typhoid character ...
    not typhus yet ... but we are very uneasy. You must not come on
    Wednesday if an infectious fever be in the house—that must be out
    of the question. May God bless you—I am quite heavy-hearted to-day,
    but never less yours,

E.B.B.


