
Sunday.
[Post-mark, October 13, 1845].


    These are bad news, dearest—all bad, except the enduring comfort of
    your regard; the illness of your brother is worst ... that would
    stay you, and is the first proper obstacle. I shall not attempt to
    speak and prove my feelings,—you know what even Flush is to me
    through you: I wait in anxiety for the next account.


    If after all you do not go to Pisa; why, we must be cheerful and
    wise, and take courage and hope. I cannot but see with your eyes and
    from your place, you know,—and will let this all be one surprizing
    and deplorable mistake of mere love and care ... but no such another
    mistake ought to be suffered, if you escape the effects of this. I
    will not cease to believe in a better event, till the very last,
    however, and it is a deep satisfaction that all has been made plain
    and straight up to this strange and sad interposition like a bar. You
    have done your part, at least—with all that forethought and counsel
    from friends and adequate judges of the case—so, if the bar will
    not move, you will consider—will you not, dearest?—where one may
    best encamp in the unforbidden country, and wait the spring and fine
    weather. Would it be advisable to go where Mr. Kenyon suggested, or
    elsewhere? Oh, these vain wishes ... the will here, and no means!


    My life is bound up with yours—my own, first and last love. What
    wonder if I feared to tire you—I who, knowing you as I do, admiring
    what is so admirable (let me speak), loving what must needs be loved,
    fain to learn what you only can teach; proud of so much, happy in so
    much of you; I, who, for all this, neither come to admire, nor feel
    proud, nor be taught,—but only, only to live with you and be by
    you—that is love—for I know the rest, as I say. I know those
    qualities are in you ... but at them I could get in so many ways.... I
    have your books, here are my letters you give me; you would answer my
    questions were I in Pisa—well, and it all would amount to nothing,
    infinitely much as I know it is; to nothing if I could not sit by you
    and see you.... I can stop at that, but not before. And it seems
    strange to me how little ... less than little I have laid open of my
    feelings, the nature of them to you—I smile to think how if all this
    while I had been acting with the profoundest policy in intention, so
    as to pledge myself to nothing I could not afterwards perform with the
    most perfect ease and security, I should have done not much unlike
    what I have done—to be sure, one word includes many or all ... but
    I have not said ... what I will not even now say ... you will
    know—in God's time to which I trust.


    I will answer your note now—the questions. I did go—(it may amuse
    you to write on)—to Moxon's. First let me tell you that when I called
    there the Saturday before, his brother (in his absence) informed me,
    replying to the question when it came naturally in turn with a round
    of like enquiries, that your poems continued to sell 'singularly
    well'—they would 'end in bringing a clear profit,' he said. I thought
    to catch him, and asked if they had done so ... 'Oh; not at the
    beginning ... it takes more time—he answered. On Thursday I saw
    Moxon—he spoke rather encouragingly of my own prospects. I send him a
    sheetful to-morrow, I believe, and we are 'out' on the 1st of next
    month. Tennyson, by the way, has got his pension, £200 per annum—by
    the other way, Moxon has bought the MSS. of Keats in the possession of
    Taylor the publisher, and is going to bring out a complete edition;
    which is pleasant to hear.


    After settling with Moxon I went to Mrs. Carlyle's—who told me
    characteristic quaintnesses of Carlyle's father and mother over the
    tea she gave me. And all yesterday, you are to know, I was in a
    permanent mortal fright—for my uncle came in the morning to intreat
    me to go to Paris in the evening about some urgent business of
    his,—a five-minutes matter with his brother there,—and the affair
    being really urgent and material to his and the brother's interest,
    and no substitute being to be thought of, I was forced to promise to
    go—in case a letter, which would arrive in Town at noon, should not
    prove satisfactory. So I calculated times, and found I could be at
    Paris to-morrow, and back again, certainly by Wednesday—and so not
    lose you on that day—oh, the fear I had!—but I was sure then and
    now, that the 17th would not see you depart. But night came, and the
    last Dover train left, and I drew breath freely—this morning I find
    the letter was all right—so may it be with all worse apprehensions!
    What you fear, precisely that, never happens, as Napoleon observed and
    thereon grew bold. I had stipulated for an hour's notice, if go I
    must—and that was to be wholly spent in writing to you—for in quiet
    consternation my mother cared for my carpet bag.


    And so, I shall hear from you to-morrow ... that is, you will write
    then, telling me all about your brother. As for what you say, with
    the kindest intentions, 'of fever-contagion' and keeping away on
    Wednesday on that account, it is indeed 'out of the question,'—for
    a first reason (which dispenses with any second) because I disbelieve
    altogether in contagion from fevers, and especially from typhus
    fevers—as do much better-informed men than myself—I speak quite
    advisedly. If there should be only that reason, therefore, you will
    not deprive me of the happiness of seeing you next Wednesday.


    I am not well—have a cold, influenza or some unpleasant thing, but am
    better than yesterday—My mother is much better, I think (she and my
    sister are resolute non-contagionists, mind you that!)


    God bless you and all you love! dearest, I am your

R.B.


