
Saturday.
[Post-mark, October 14, 1845.]


    It was the merest foolishness in me to write about fevers and the rest
    as I did to-day, just as if it could do any good, all the wringing of
    hands in the world. And there is no typhus yet ... and no danger of
    any sort I hope and trust!—and how weak it is that habit of spreading
    the cloud which is in you all around you, how weak and selfish ... and
    unlike what you would do ... just as you are unlike Mr. Kenyon. And
    you are unlike him—and you were right on Thursday when you said
    so, and I was wrong in setting up a phrase on the other side ... only
    what I said came by an instinct because you seemed to be giving him
    all the sunshine to use and carry, which should not be after all. But
    you are unlike him and must be ... seeing that the producers must
    differ from the 'nati consumere fruges' in the intellectual as in the
    material. You create and he enjoys, and the work makes you pale and
    the pleasure makes him ruddy, and it is so of a necessity. So differs
    the man of genius from the man of letters—and then dear Mr. Kenyon is
    not even a man of letters in a full sense ... he is rather a Sybarite
    of letters. Do you think he ever knew what mental labour is? I fancy
    not. Not more than he has known what mental inspiration is! And not
    more than he has known what the strife of the heart is ... with all
    his tenderness and sensibility. He seems to me to evade pain, and
    where he suffers at all to do so rather negatively than positively ...
    if you understand what I mean by that ... rather by a want than by a
    blow: the secret of all being that he has a certain latitudinarianism
    (not indifferentism) in his life and affections, and has no capacity
    for concentration and intensity. Partly by temperament and partly by
    philosophy he contrives to keep the sunny side of the street—though
    never inclined to forget the blind man at the corner. Ah, dear Mr.
    Kenyon: he is magnanimous in toleration, and excellent in
    sympathy—and he has the love of beauty and the reverence of
    genius—but the faculty of worship he has not: he will not worship
    aright either your heroes or your gods ... and while you do it he only
    'tolerates' the act in you. Once he said ... not to me ... but I heard
    of it: 'What, if genius should be nothing but scrofula?' and he doubts
    (I very much fear) whether the world is not governed by a throw of
    those very same 'loaded dice,' and no otherwise. Yet he reveres genius
    in the acting of it, and recognizes a God in creation—only it is but
    'so far,' and not farther. At least I think not—and I have a right to
    think what I please of him, holding him as I do, in such true
    affection. One of the kindest and most indulgent of human beings has
    he been to me, and I am happy to be grateful to him.


    Sunday.—The Duke of Palmella takes the whole vessel for the 20th
    and therefore if I go it must be on the 17th. Therefore (besides) as
    George must be on sessions to-morrow, he will settle the question with
    Papa to-night. In the meantime our poor Occy is not much better,
    though a little, and is ordered leeches on his head, and is confined
    to his bed and attended by physician and surgeon. It is not decided
    typhus, but they will not answer for its not being infectious; and
    although he is quite at the top of the house, two stories above me, I
    shall not like you to come indeed. And then there will be only room
    for a farewell, and I who am a coward shrink from the saying of it.
    No—not being able to see you to-morrow, (Mr. Kenyon is to be here
    to-morrow, he says) let us agree to throw away Wednesday. I will
    write, ... you will write perhaps—and above all things you will
    promise to write by the 'Star' on Monday, that the captain may give me
    your letter at Gibraltar. You promise? But I shall hear from you
    before then, and oftener than once, and you will acquiesce about
    Wednesday and grant at once that there can be no gain, no good, in
    that miserable good-bye-ing. I do not want the pain of it to remember
    you by—I shall remember very well without it, be sure. Still it shall
    be as you like—as you shall chose—and if you are disappointed
    about Wednesday (if it is not vain in me to talk of disappointments)
    why do with Wednesday as you think best ... always understanding that
    there's no risk of infection.


    Monday.—All this I had written yesterday—and to-day it all is
    worse than vain. Do not be angry with me—do not think it my
    fault—but I do not go to Italy ... it has ended as I feared. What
    passed between George and Papa there is no need of telling: only the
    latter said that I 'might go if I pleased, but that going it would be
    under his heaviest displeasure.' George, in great indignation,
    pressed the question fully: but all was vain ... and I am left in this
    position ... to go, if I please, with his displeasure over me, (which
    after what you have said and after what Mr. Kenyon has said, and after
    what my own conscience and deepest moral convictions say aloud, I
    would unhesitatingly do at this hour!) and necessarily run the risk of
    exposing my sister and brother to that same displeasure ... from which
    risk I shrink and fall back and feel that to incur it, is impossible.
    Dear Mr. Kenyon has been here and we have been talking—and he sees
    what I see ... that I am justified in going myself, but not in
    bringing others into difficulty. The very kindness and goodness with
    which they desire me (both my sisters) 'not to think of them,'
    naturally makes me think more of them. And so, tell me that I am not
    wrong in taking up my chain again and acquiescing in this hard
    necessity. The bitterest 'fact' of all is, that I had believed Papa to
    have loved me more than he obviously does: but I never regret
    knowledge ... I mean I never would unknow anything ... even were it
    the taste of the apples by the Dead sea—and this must be accepted
    like the rest. In the meantime your letter comes—and if I could seem
    to be very unhappy after reading it ... why it would be 'all pretence'
    on my part, believe me. Can you care for me so much ... you? Then
    that is light enough to account for all the shadows, and to make
    them almost unregarded—the shadows of the life behind. Moreover dear
    Occy is somewhat better—with a pulse only at ninety: and the doctors
    declare that visitors may come to the house without any manner of
    danger. Or I should not trust to your theories—no, indeed: it was not
    that I expected you to be afraid, but that I was afraid—and if I am
    not ashamed for that, why at least I am, for being lâche about
    Wednesday, when you thought of hurrying back from Paris only for it!
    You could think that!—You can care for me so much!—(I come to
    it again!) When I hold some words to my eyes ... such as these in
    this letter ... I can see nothing beyond them ... no evil, no want.
    There is no evil and no want. Am I wrong in the decision about
    Italy? Could I do otherwise? I had courage and to spare—but the
    question, you see, did not regard myself wholly. For the rest, the
    'unforbidden country' lies within these four walls. Madeira was
    proposed in vain—and any part of England would be as objectionable as
    Italy, and not more advantageous to me than Wimpole Street. To take
    courage and be cheerful, as you say, is left as an alternative—and
    (the winter may be mild!) to fall into the hands of God rather than of
    man: and I shall be here for your November, remember.


    And now that you are not well, will you take care? and not come on
    Wednesday unless you are better? and never again bring me wet
    flowers, which probably did all the harm on Thursday? I was afraid
    for you then, though I said nothing. May God bless you.

Ever yours I am—your own.


    Ninety is not a high pulse ... for a fever of this kind—is it? and
    the heat diminishes, and his spirits are better—and we are all much
    easier ... have been both to-day and yesterday indeed.


