
Wednesday.
[Post-mark, October 16, 1845.]


    Your letter which should have reached me in the morning of yesterday,
    I did not receive until nearly midnight—partly through the
    eccentricity of our new postman whose good pleasure it is to make use
    of the letter-box without knocking; and partly from the confusion in
    the house, of illness in different ways ... the very servants being
    ill, ... one of them breaking a blood-vessel—for there is no new case
    of fever; ... and for dear Occy, he grows better slowly day by day.
    And just so late last night, five letters were found in the
    letter-box, and mine ... yours ... among them—which accounts for my
    beginning to answer it only now.


    What am I to say but this ... that I know what you are ... and that I
    know also what you are to me,—and that I should accept that
    knowledge as more than sufficient recompense for worse vexations than
    these late ones. Therefore let no more be said of them: and no more
    need be said, even if they were not likely to prove their own end
    good, as I believe with you. You may be quite sure that I shall be
    well this winter, if in any way it should be possible, and that I
    will not be beaten down, if the will can do anything. I admire how,
    if all had happened so but a year ago, (yet it could not have happened
    quite so!), I should certainly have been beaten down—and how it is
    different now, ... and how it is only gratitude to you, to say that
    it is different now. My cage is not worse but better since you brought
    the green groundsel to it—and to dash oneself against the wires of it
    will not open the door. We shall see ... and God will oversee. And in
    the meantime you will not talk of extravagances; and then nobody need
    hold up the hand—because, as I said and say, I am yours, your
    own—only not to hurt you. So now let us talk of the first of
    November and of the poems which are to come out then, and of the poems
    which are to come after then—and of the new avatar of 'Sordello,' for
    instance, which you taught me to look for. And let us both be busy and
    cheerful—and you will come and see me throughout the winter, ... if
    you do not decide rather on going abroad, which may be better ...
    better for your health's sake?—in which case I shall have your
    letters.


    And here is another ... just arrived. How I thank you. Think of the
    Times! Still it was very well of them to recognise your
    principality. Oh yes—do let me see the proof—I understand too about
    the 'making and spoiling.'


    Almost you forced me to smile by thinking it worth while to say that
    you are 'not selfish.' Did Sir Percival say so to Sir Gawaine across
    the Round Table, in those times of chivalry to which you belong by the
    soul? Certainly you are not selfish! May God bless you.

Ever your
E.B.B.


    The fever may last, they say, for a week longer, or even a
    fortnight—but it decreases. Yet he is hot still, and very weak.


    To to-morrow!


