
Friday.
[Post-mark, October 17, 1845.]


    Do tell me what you mean precisely by your 'Bells and Pomegranates'
    title. I have always understood it to refer to the Hebraic priestly
    garment—but Mr. Kenyon held against me the other day that your
    reference was different, though he had not the remotest idea how. And
    yesterday I forgot to ask, for not the first time. Tell me too why you
    should not in the new number satisfy, by a note somewhere, the Davuses
    of the world who are in the majority ('Davi sumus, non Oedipi') with a
    solution of this one Sphinx riddle. Is there a reason against it?


    Occy continues to make progress—with a pulse at only eighty-four this
    morning. Are you learned in the pulse that I should talk as if you
    were? I, who have had my lessons? He takes scarcely anything yet but
    water, and his head is very hot still—but the progress is quite
    sure, though it may be a lingering case.


    Your beautiful flowers!—none the less beautiful for waiting for water
    yesterday. As fresh as ever, they were; and while I was putting them
    into the water, I thought that your visit went on all the time. Other
    thoughts too I had, which made me look down blindly, quite blindly, on
    the little blue flowers, ... while I thought what I could not have
    said an hour before without breaking into tears which would have run
    faster then. To say now that I never can forget; that I feel myself
    bound to you as one human being cannot be more bound to another;—and
    that you are more to me at this moment than all the rest of the world;
    is only to say in new words that it would be a wrong against myself,
    to seem to risk your happiness and abuse your generosity. For me ...
    though you threw out words yesterday about the testimony of a 'third
    person,' ... it would be monstrous to assume it to be necessary to
    vindicate my trust of you—I trust you implicitly—and am not too
    proud to owe all things to you. But now let us wait and see what this
    winter does or undoes—while God does His part for good, as we know. I
    will never fail to you from any human influence whatever—that I
    have promised—but you must let it be different from the other sort of
    promise which it would be a wrong to make. May God bless you—you,
    whose fault it is, to be too generous. You are not like other men,
    as I could see from the beginning—no.


    Shall I have the proof to-night, I ask myself.


    And if you like to come on Monday rather than Tuesday, I do not see
    why there should be a 'no' to that. Judge from your own convenience.
    Only we must be wise in the general practice, and abstain from too
    frequent meetings, for fear of difficulties. I am Cassandra you know,
    and smell the slaughter in the bath-room. It would make no difference
    in fact; but in comfort, much.

Ever your own—


