
[Post-mark, October 22, 1845.]


    Even at the risk of teazing you a little I must say a few words, that
    there may be no misunderstanding between us—and this, before I sleep
    to-night. To-day and before to-day you surprised me by your manner of
    receiving my remark about your visits, for I believed I had
    sufficiently made clear to you long ago how certain questions were
    ordered in this house and how no exception was to be expected for my
    sake or even for yours. Surely I told you this quite plainly long ago.
    I only meant to say in my last letter, in the same track ... (fearing
    in the case of your wishing to come oftener that you might think it
    unkind in me not to seem to wish the same) ... that if you came too
    often and it was observed, difficulties and vexations would follow
    as a matter of course, and it would be wise therefore to run no risk.
    That was the head and front of what I meant to say. The weekly one
    visit is a thing established and may go on as long as you please—and
    there is no objection to your coming twice a week now and then ...
    if now and then merely ... if there is no habit ... do you understand?
    I may be prudent in an extreme perhaps—and certainly everybody in the
    house is not equally prudent!—but I did shrink from running any risk
    with that calm and comfort of the winter as it seemed to come on. And
    was it more than I said about the cloak? was there any newness in it?
    anything to startle you? Still I do perfectly see that whether new or
    old, what it involves may well be unpleasant to you—and that
    (however old) it may be apt to recur to your mind with a new
    increasing unpleasantness. We have both been carried too far perhaps,
    by late events and impulses—but it is never too late to come back to
    a right place, and I for my part come back to mine, and entreat you my
    dearest friend, first, not to answer this, and next, to weigh and
    consider thoroughly 'that particular contingency' which (I tell you
    plainly, I who know) the tongue of men and of angels would not modify
    so as to render less full of vexations to you. Let Pisa prove the
    excellent hardness of some marbles! Judge. From motives of
    self-respect, you may well walk an opposite way ... you.... When I
    told you once ... or twice ... that 'no human influence should' &c.
    &c., ... I spoke for myself, quite over-looking you—and now that I
    turn and see you, I am surprised that I did not see you before ...
    there. I ask you therefore to consider 'that contingency' well—not
    forgetting the other obvious evils, which the late decision about Pisa
    has aggravated beyond calculation ... for as the smoke rolls off we
    see the harm done by the fire. And so, and now ... is it not advisable
    for you to go abroad at once ... as you always intended, you know ...
    now that your book is through the press? What if you go next week? I
    leave it to you. In any case I entreat you not to answer
    this—neither let your thoughts be too hard on me for what you may
    call perhaps vacillation—only that I stand excused (I do not say
    justified) before my own moral sense. May God bless you. If you go, I
    shall wait to see you till your return, and have letters in the
    meantime. I write all this as fast as I can to have it over. What I
    ask of you is, to consider alone and decide advisedly ... for both our
    sakes. If it should be your choice not to make an end now, ... why I
    shall understand that by your not going ... or you may say 'no' in
    a word ... for I require no 'protestations' indeed—and you may
    trust to me ... it shall be as you choose. You will consider my
    happiness most by considering your own ... and that is my last word.


    Wednesday morning.—I did not say half I thought about the poems
    yesterday—and their various power and beauty will be striking and
    surprising to your most accustomed readers. 'St. Praxed'—'Pictor
    Ignotus'—'The Ride'—'The Duchess'!—Of the new poems I like
    supremely the first and last ... that 'Lost Leader' which strikes so
    broadly and deep ... which nobody can ever forget—and which is worth
    all the journalizing and pamphleteering in the world!—and then, the
    last 'Thought' which is quite to be grudged to that place of fragments
    ... those grand sea-sights in the long lines. Should not these
    fragments be severed otherwise than by numbers? The last stanza but
    one of the 'Lost Mistress' seemed obscure to me. Is it so really? The
    end you have put to 'England in Italy' gives unity to the whole ...
    just what the poem wanted. Also you have given some nobler lines to
    the middle than met me there before. 'The Duchess' appears to me more
    than ever a new-minted golden coin—the rhythm of it answering to your
    own description, 'Speech half asleep, or song half awake?' You have
    right of trove to these novel effects of rhythm. Now if people do not
    cry out about these poems, what are we to think of the world?


    May God bless you always—send me the next proof in any case.

Your
E.B.B.


