
[Post-mark, October 23, 1845.]


    But I must answer you, and be forgiven, too, dearest. I was (to
    begin at the beginning) surely not 'startled' ... only properly
    aware of the deep blessing I have been enjoying this while, and not
    disposed to take its continuance as pure matter of course, and so
    treat with indifference the first shadow of a threatening intimation
    from without, the first hint of a possible abstraction from the
    quarter to which so many hopes and fears of mine have gone of late. In
    this case, knowing you, I was sure that if any imaginable form of
    displeasure could touch you without reaching me, I should not hear of
    it too soon—so I spoke—so you have spoken—and so now you get
    'excused'? No—wondered at, with all my faculty of wonder for the
    strange exalting way you will persist to think of me; now, once for
    all, I will not pass for what I make no least pretence to. I quite
    understand the grace of your imaginary self-denial, and fidelity to a
    given word, and noble constancy; but it all happens to be none of
    mine, none in the least. I love you because I love you; I see you
    'once a week' because I cannot see you all day long; I think of you
    all day long, because I most certainly could not think of you once an
    hour less, if I tried, or went to Pisa, or 'abroad' (in every sense)
    in order to 'be happy' ... a kind of adventure which you seem to
    suppose you have in some way interfered with. Do, for this once,
    think, and never after, on the impossibility of your ever (you know I
    must talk your own language, so I shall say—) hindering any scheme of
    mine, stopping any supposable advancement of mine. Do you really think
    that before I found you, I was going about the world seeking whom I
    might devour, that is, be devoured by, in the shape of a wife ... do
    you suppose I ever dreamed of marrying? What would it mean for me,
    with my life I am hardened in—considering the rational chances; how
    the land is used to furnish its contingent of Shakespeare's women: or
    by 'success,' 'happiness' &c. &c. you never never can be seeing for a
    moment with the world's eyes and meaning 'getting rich' and all that?
    Yet, put that away, and what do you meet at every turn, if you are
    hunting about in the dusk to catch my good, but yourself?


    I know who has got it, caught it, and means to keep it on his
    heart—the person most concerned—I, dearest, who cannot play the
    disinterested part of bidding you forget your 'protestation' ...
    what should I have to hold by, come what will, through years, through
    this life, if God shall so determine, if I were not sure, sure that
    the first moment when you can suffer me with you 'in that relation,'
    you will remember and act accordingly. I will, as you know, conform my
    life to any imaginable rule which shall render it possible for your
    life to move with it and possess it, all the little it is worth.


    For your friends ... whatever can be 'got over,' whatever opposition
    may be rational, will be easily removed, I suppose. You know when I
    spoke lately about the 'selfishness' I dared believe I was free from,
    I hardly meant the low faults of ... I shall say, a different
    organization to mine—which has vices in plenty, but not those.
    Besides half a dozen scratches with a pen make one stand up an
    apparent angel of light, from the lawyer's parchment; and Doctors'
    Commons is one bland smile of applause. The selfishness I deprecate is
    one which a good many women, and men too, call 'real passion'—under
    the influence of which, I ought to say 'be mine, what ever happens to
    you'—but I know better, and you know best—and you know me, for all
    this letter, which is no doubt in me, I feel, but dear entire goodness
    and affection, of which God knows whether I am proud or not—and now
    you will let me be, will not you. Let me have my way, live my life,
    love my love.


    When I am, praying God to bless her ever,

R.B.


