
Friday.
[Post-mark, October 25, 1845.]


    I wrote briefly yesterday not to make my letter longer by keeping it;
    and a few last words which belong to it by right, must follow after it
    ... must—for I want to say that you need not indeed talk to me about
    squares being not round, and of you being not 'selfish'! You know it
    is foolish to talk such superfluities, and not a compliment.


    I won't say to my knowledge of you and faith in you ... but to my
    understanding generally. Why should you say to me at all ... much
    less for this third or fourth time ... 'I am not selfish?' to me who
    never ... when I have been deepest asleep and dreaming, ... never
    dreamed of attributing to you any form of such a fault? Promise not to
    say so again—now promise. Think how it must sound to my ears, when
    really and truly I have sometimes felt jealous of myself ... of my own
    infirmities, ... and thought that you cared for me only because your
    chivalry touched them with a silver sound—and that, without them, you
    would pass by on the other side:—why twenty times I have thought
    that and been vexed—ungrateful vexation! In exchange for which too
    frank confession, I will ask for another silent promise ... a silent
    promise—no, but first I will say another thing.


    First I will say that you are not to fancy any the least danger of my
    falling under displeasure through your visits—there is no sort of
    risk of it for the present—and if I ran the risk of making you
    uncomfortable about that, I did foolishly, and what I meant to do
    was different. I wish you also to understand that even if you came
    here every day, my brothers and sisters would simply care to know if
    I liked it, and then be glad if I was glad:—the caution referred to
    one person alone. In relation to whom, however, there will be no
    'getting over'—you might as well think to sweep off a third of the
    stars of Heaven with the motion of your eyelashes—this, for matter of
    fact and certainty—and this, as I said before, the keeping of a
    general rule and from no disrespect towards individuals: a great
    peculiarity in the individual of course. But ... though I have been
    a submissive daughter, and this from no effort, but for love's sake
    ... because I loved him tenderly (and love him), ... and hoped that he
    loved me back again even if the proofs came untenderly sometimes—yet
    I have reserved for myself always that right over my own affections
    which is the most strictly personal of all things, and which involves
    principles and consequences of infinite importance and scope—even
    though I never thought (except perhaps when the door of life was
    just about to open ... before it opened) never thought it probable or
    possible that I should have occasion for the exercise; from without
    and from within at once. I have too much need to look up. For friends,
    I can look any way ... round, and down even—the merest thread of a
    sympathy will draw me sometimes—or even the least look of kind eyes
    over a dyspathy—'Cela se peut facilement.' But for another
    relation—it was all different—and rightly so—and so very
    different—'Cela ne se peut nullement'—as in Malherbe.


    And now we must agree to 'let all this be,', and set ourselves to get
    as much good and enjoyment from the coming winter (better spent at
    Pisa!) as we can—and I begin my joy by being glad that you are not
    going since I am not going, and by being proud of these new green
    leaves in your bay which came out with the new number. And then will
    come the tragedies—and then, ... what beside? We shall have a happy
    winter after all ... I shall at least; and if Pisa had been better,
    London might be worse: and for me to grow pretentious and fastidious
    and critical about various sorts of purple ... I, who have been used
    to the brun foncé of Mme. de Sévigné, (foncé and enfoncé
    ...)—would be too absurd. But why does not the proof come all this
    time? I have kept this letter to go back with it.


    I had a proposition from the New York booksellers about six weeks ago
    (the booksellers who printed the poems) to let them re-print those
    prose papers of mine in the Athenæum, with additional matter on
    American literature, in a volume by itself—to be published at the
    same time both in America and England by Wiley and Putnam in Waterloo
    Place, and meaning to offer liberal terms, they said. Now what shall I
    do? Those papers are not fit for separate publication, and I am not
    inclined to the responsibility of them; and in any case, they must
    give as much trouble as if they were re-written (trouble and not
    poetry!), before I could consent to such a thing. Well!—and if I do
    not ... these people are just as likely to print them without leave
    ... and so without correction. What do you advise? What shall I do?
    All this time they think me sublimely indifferent, they who pressed
    for an answer by return of packet—and now it is past six ... eight
    weeks; and I must say something.


    Am I not 'femme qui parle' to-day? And let me talk on ever so, the
    proof won't come. May God bless you—and me as I am

Yours,           

E.B.B.


    And the silent promise I would have you make is this—that if ever you
    should leave me, it shall be (though you are not 'selfish') for your
    sake—and not for mine: for your good, and not for mine. I ask it—not
    because I am disinterested; but because one class of motives would be
    valid, and the other void—simply for that reason.


    Then the femme qui parle (looking back over the parlance) did not
    mean to say on the first page of this letter that she was ever for a
    moment vexed in her pride that she should owe anything to her
    adversities. It was only because adversities are accidents and not
    essentials. If it had been prosperities, it would have been the same
    thing—no, not the same thing!—but far worse.


    Occy is up to-day and doing well.


