
[Post-mark, October 27, 1845.]


    How does one make 'silent promises' ... or, rather, how does the maker
    of them communicate that fact to whomsoever it may concern? I know,
    there have been many, very many unutterable vows and promises
    made,—that is, thought down upon—the white slip at the top of my
    notes,—such as of this note; and not trusted to the pen, that always
    comes in for the shame,—but given up, and replaced by the poor forms
    to which a pen is equal; and a glad minute I should account that, in
    which you collected and accepted those 'promises'—because they
    would not be all so unworthy of me—much less you! I would receive, in
    virtue of them, the ascription of whatever worthiness is supposed to
    lie in deep, truest love, and gratitude—

Read my silent answer there too!


    All your letter is one comfort: we will be happy this winter, and
    after, do not fear. I am most happy, to begin, that your brother is so
    much better: he must be weak and susceptible of cold, remember.


    It was on my lip, I do think, last visit, or the last but one, to
    beg you to detach those papers from the Athenæum's gâchis. Certainly
    this opportunity is most favourable, for every reason: you cannot
    hesitate, surely. At present those papers are lost—lost for
    practical purposes. Do pray reply without fail to the proposers; no,
    no harm of these really fine fellows, who could do harm (by printing
    incorrect copies, and perhaps eking out the column by suppositious
    matter ... ex-gr. they strengthened and lengthened a book of Dickens',
    in Paris, by adding quant. suff. of Thackeray's 'Yellowplush Papers'
    ... as I discovered by a Parisian somebody praising the latter to me
    as Dickens' best work!)—and who do really a good straightforward
    un-American thing. You will encourage 'the day of small
    things'—though this is not small, nor likely to have small results. I
    shall be impatient to hear that you have decided. I like the progress
    of these Americans in taste, their amazing leaps, like grasshoppers up
    to the sun—from ... what is the 'from,' what depth, do you
    remember, say, ten or twelve years back?—to—Carlyle, and Tennyson,
    and you! So children leave off Jack of Cornwall and go on just to
    Homer.


    I can't conceive why my proof does not come—I must go to-morrow and
    see. In the other, I have corrected all the points you noted, to their
    evident improvement. Yesterday I took out 'Luria' and read it
    through—the skeleton—I shall hope to finish it soon now. It is for a
    purely imaginary stage,—very simple and straightforward. Would you
    ... no, Act by Act, as I was about to propose that you should read it;
    that process would affect the oneness I most wish to preserve.


    On Tuesday—at last, I am with you. Till when be with me ever,
    dearest—God bless you ever—

R.B.


