
Wednesday Night.
[Post-mark, October 30, 1845.]


    Like your kindness—too, far too generous kindness,—all this trouble
    and correcting,—and it is my proper office now, by this time, to sit
    still and receive, by right Human (as opposed to Divine). When you
    see the pamphlet's self, you will find your own doing,—but where will
    you find the proofs of the best of all helping and counselling and
    inciting, unless in new works which shall justify the
    unsatisfaction, if I may not say shame, at these, these written
    before your time, my best love?


    Are you doing well to-day? For I feel well, have walked some eight or
    nine miles—and my mother is very much better ... is singularly
    better. You know whether you rejoiced me or no by that information
    about the exercise you had taken yesterday. Think what telling one
    that you grow stronger would mean!


    'Vexatious' with you! Ah, prudence is all very right, and one ought,
    no doubt, to say, 'of course, we shall not expect a life exempt from
    the usual proportion of &c. &c.—' but truth is still more right, and
    includes the highest prudence besides, and I do believe that we shall
    be happy; that is, that you will be happy: you see I dare
    confidently expect the end to it all ... so it has always been with
    me in my life of wonders—absolute wonders, with God's hand over
    all.... And this last and best of all would never have begun so, and
    gone on so, to break off abruptly even here, in this world, for the
    little time.


    So try, try, dearest, every method, take every measure of hastening
    such a consummation. Why, we shall see Italy together! I could, would,
    will shut myself in four walls of a room with you and never leave
    you and be most of all then 'a lord of infinite space'—but, to
    travel with you to Italy, or Greece. Very vain, I know that, all such
    day dreaming! And ungrateful, too; with the real sufficing happiness
    here of being, and knowing that you know me to be, and suffer me to
    tell you I am yours, ever your own.

God bless you, my dearest—


