
[Post-mark, November 1, 1845.]


    All to-day, Friday, Miss Mitford has been here! She came at two and
    went away at seven—and I feel as if I had been making a five-hour
    speech on the corn laws in Harriet Martineau's parliament; ... so
    tired I am. Not that dear Miss Mitford did not talk both for me and
    herself, ... for that, of course she did. But I was forced to answer
    once every ten minutes at least—and Flush, my usual companion, does
    not exact so much—and so I am tired and come to rest myself on this
    paper. Your name was not once spoken to-day; a little from my good
    fencing: when I saw you at the end of an alley of associations, I
    pushed the conversation up the next—because I was afraid of questions
    such as every moment I expected, with a pair of woman's eyes behind
    them; and those are worse than Mr. Kenyon's, when he puts on his
    spectacles. So your name was not once spoken—not thought of, I do not
    say—perhaps when I once lost her at Chevy Chase and found her
    suddenly with Isidore the queen's hairdresser, my thoughts might have
    wandered off to you and your unanswered letter while she passed
    gradually from that to this—I am not sure of the contrary. And
    Isidore, they say, reads Béranger, and is supposed to be the most
    literary person at court—and wasn't at Chevy Chase one must needs
    think.


    One must needs write nonsense rather—for I have written it there. The
    sense and the truth is, that your letter went to the bottom of my
    heart, and that my thoughts have turned round it ever since and
    through all the talking to-day. Yes indeed, dreams! But what is not
    dreaming is this and this—this reading of these words—this proof of
    this regard—all this that you are to me in fact, and which you cannot
    guess the full meaning of, dramatic poet as you are ... cannot ...
    since you do not know what my life meant before you touched it, ...
    and my angel at the gate of the prison! My wonder is greater than your
    wonders, ... I who sate here alone but yesterday, so weary of my own
    being that to take interest in my very poems I had to lift them up by
    an effort and separate them from myself and cast them out from me into
    the sunshine where I was not—feeling nothing of the light which fell
    on them even—making indeed a sort of pleasure and interest about that
    factitious personality associated with them ... but knowing it to be
    all far on the outside of me ... myself ... not seeming to touch
    it with the end of my finger ... and receiving it as a mockery and a
    bitterness when people persisted in confounding one with another.
    Morbid it was if you like it—perhaps very morbid—but all these heaps
    of letters which go into the fire one after the other, and which,
    because I am a woman and have written verses, it seems so amusing to
    the letter-writers of your sex to write and see 'what will come of
    it,' ... some, from kind good motives I know, ... well, ... how could
    it all make for me even such a narrow strip of sunshine as Flush finds
    on the floor sometimes, and lays his nose along, with both ears out in
    the shadow? It was not for me ... me ... in any way: it was not
    within my reach—I did not seem to touch it as I said. Flush came
    nearer, and I was grateful to him ... yes, grateful ... for not being
    tired! I have felt grateful and flattered ... yes flattered ... when
    he has chosen rather to stay with me all day than go down-stairs.
    Grateful too, with reason, I have been and am to my own family for not
    letting me see that I was a burthen. These are facts. And now how am I
    to feel when you tell me what you have told me—and what you 'could
    would and will' do, and shall not do?... but when you tell me?


    Only remember that such words make you freer and freer—if you can be
    freer than free—just as every one makes me happier and richer—too
    rich by you, to claim any debt. May God bless you always. When I wrote
    that letter to let you come the first time, do you know, the tears ran
    down my cheeks.... I could not tell why: partly it might be mere
    nervousness. And then, I was vexed with you for wishing to come as
    other people did, and vexed with myself for not being able to refuse
    you as I did them.


    When does the book come out? Not on the first, I begin to be glad.

Ever yours,
E.B.B.


    I trust that you go on to take exercise—and that your mother is still
    better. Occy's worst symptom now is too great an appetite ... a
    monster-appetite indeed.


