
Wednesday.
[Post-mark, November 6, 1845.]


    I had your note last night, and am waiting for the book to-day; a true
    living breathing book, let the writer say of it what he will. Also
    when it comes it won't certainly come 'sine te.' Which is my comfort.


    And now—not to make any more fuss about a matter of simple
    restitution—may I have my letter back?... I mean the letter which if
    you did not destroy ... did not punish for its sins long and long ago
    ... belongs to me—which, if destroyed, I must lose for my sins, ...
    but, if undestroyed, which I may have back; may I not? is it not my
    own? must I not?—that letter I was made to return and now turn to ask
    for again in further expiation. Now do I ask humbly enough? And send
    it at once, if undestroyed—do not wait till Saturday.


    I have considered about Mr. Kenyon and it seems best, in the event of
    a question or of a remark equivalent to a question, to confess to the
    visits 'generally once a week' ... because he may hear, one, two,
    three different ways, ... not to say the other reasons and Chaucer's
    charge against 'doubleness.' I fear ... I fear that he (not Chaucer)
    will wonder a little—and he has looked at me with scanning spectacles
    already and talked of its being a mystery to him how you made your way
    here; and I, who though I can bespeak self-command, have no sort
    of presence of mind (not so much as one would use to play at Jack
    straws) did not help the case at all. Well—it cannot be helped. Did I
    ever tell you what he said of you once—'that you deserved to be a
    poet—being one in your heart and life:' he said that of you to me,
    and I thought it a noble encomium and deserving its application.


    For the rest ... yes: you know I do—God knows I do. Whatever I can
    feel is for you—and perhaps it is not less, for not being simmered
    away in too much sunshine as with women accounted happier. I am
    happy besides now—happy enough to die now.

May God bless you, dear—dearest—
Ever I am yours—


    The book does not come—so I shall not wait. Mr. Kenyon came instead,
    and comes again on Friday he says, and Saturday seems to be clear
    still.


