
Thursday Evening.
[Post-mark, November 7, 1845.]


    I see and know; read and mark; and only hope there is no harm done by
    my meddling; and lose the sense of it all in the sense of beauty and
    power everywhere, which nobody could kill, if they took to meddling
    more even. And now, what will people say to this and this and this—or
    'O seclum insipiens et inficetum!' or rather, O ungrateful right hand
    which does not thank you first! I do thank you. I have been reading
    everything with new delight; and at intervals remembering in
    inglorious complacency (for which you must try to forgive me) that Mr.
    Forster is no longer anything like an enemy. And yet (just see what
    contradiction!) the British Quarterly has been abusing me so at
    large, that I can only take it to be the achievement of a very
    particular friend indeed,—of someone who positively never reviewed
    before and tries his new sword on me out of pure friendship. Only I
    suppose it is not the general rule, and that there are friends 'with a
    difference.' Not that you are to fancy me pained—oh no!—merely
    surprised. I was prepared for anything almost from the quarter in
    question, but scarcely for being hung 'to the crows' so publicly ...
    though within the bounds of legitimate criticisms, mind. But oh—the
    creatures of your sex are not always magnanimous—that is true. And
    to put you between me and all ... the thought of you ... in a
    great eclipse of the world ... that is happy ... only, too happy for
    such as I am; as my own heart warns me hour by hour.


    'Serve me right'—I do not dare to complain. I wished for the safety
    of that letter so much that I finished by persuading myself of the
    probability of it: but 'serve me right' quite clearly. And yet—but
    no more 'and yets' about it. 'And yets' fray the silk.


    I see how the 'turret' stands in the new reading, triumphing over the
    'tower,' and unexceptionable in every respect. Also I do hold that
    nobody with an ordinary understanding has the slightest pretence for
    attaching a charge of obscurity to this new number—there are lights
    enough for the critics to scan one another's dull blank of visage by.
    One verse indeed in that expressive lyric of the 'Lost Mistress,' does
    still seem questionable to me, though you have changed a word since I
    saw it; and still I fancy that I rather leap at the meaning than reach
    it—but it is my own fault probably ... I am not sure. With that one
    exception I am quite sure that people who shall complain of darkness
    are blind ... I mean, that the construction is clear and unembarrassed
    everywhere. Subtleties of thought which are not directly apprehensible
    by minds of a common range, are here as elsewhere in your
    writings—but if to utter things 'hard to understand' from that
    cause be an offence, why we may begin with 'our beloved brother Paul,'
    you know, and go down through all the geniuses of the world, and bid
    them put away their inspirations. You must descend to the level of
    critic A or B, that he may look into your face.... Ah well!—'Let them
    rave.' You will live when all those are under the willows. In the
    meantime there is something better, as you said, even than your
    poetry—as the giver is better than the gift, and the maker than the
    creature, and you than yours. Yes—you than yours.... (I did
    not mean it so when I wrote it first ... but I accept the 'bona
    verba,' and use the phrase for the end of my letter) ... as you are
    better than yours; even when so much yours as your own

E.B.B.


    May I see the first act first? Let me!—And you walk?


    Mr. Horne's address is Hill Side, Fitzroy Park, Highgate.


    There is no reason against Saturday so far. Mr. Kenyon comes
    to-morrow, Friday, and therefore—!—and if Saturday should become
    impracticable, I will write again.


