
Monday.
[Post-mark, November 11, 1845.]


    If it were possible that you could do me harm in the way of work, (but
    it isn't) it would be possible, not through writing letters and
    reading manuscripts, but because of a reason to be drawn from your own
    great line

What man is strong until he stands alone?

What man ... what woman? For have I not felt twenty times the desolate
    advantage of being insulated here and of not minding anybody when I
    made my poems?—of living a little like a disembodied spirit, and
    caring less for suppositious criticism than for the black fly buzzing
    in the pane?—That made me what dear Mr. Kenyon calls
    'insolent,'—untimid, and unconventional in my degree; and not so much
    by strength, you see, as by separation. You touch your greater ends
    by mere strength; breaking with your own hands the hampering threads
    which, in your position would have hampered me.


    Still ... when all is changed for me now, and different, it is not
    possible, ... for all the changing, nor for all your line and my
    speculation, ... that I should not be better and stronger for being
    within your influences and sympathies, in this way of writing as in
    other ways. We shall see—you will see. Yet I have been idle lately I
    confess; leaning half out of some turret-window of the castle of
    Indolence and watching the new sunrise—as why not?—Do I mean to be
    idle always?—no!—and am I not an industrious worker on the average
    of days? Indeed yes! Also I have been less idle than you think
    perhaps, even this last year, though the results seem so like
    trifling: and I shall set about the prose papers for the New York
    people, and the something rather better besides we may hope ... may
    I not hope, if you wish it? Only there is no 'crown' for me, be
    sure, except what grows from this letter and such letters ... this
    sense of being anything to one! there is no room for another crown.
    Have I a great head like Goethe's that there should be room? and mine
    is bent down already by the unused weight—and as to bearing it, ...
    'Will it do,—tell me; to treat that as a light effort, an easy
    matter?'


    Now let me remember to tell you that the line of yours I have just
    quoted, and which has been present with me since you wrote it, Mr.
    Chorley has quoted too in his new novel of 'Pomfret.' You were right
    in your identifying of servant and waistcoat—and Wilson waited only
    till you had gone on Saturday, to give me a parcel and note; the novel
    itself in fact, which Mr. Chorley had the kindness to send me 'some
    days or weeks,' said the note, 'previous to the publication.' Very
    goodnatured of him certainly: and the book seems to me his best work
    in point of sustainment and vigour, and I am in process of being
    interested in it. Not that he is a maker, even for this prose. A
    feeler ... an observer ... a thinker even, in a certain sphere—but a
    maker ... no, as it seems to me—and if I were he, I would rather herd
    with the essayists than the novelists where he is too good to take
    inferior rank and not strong enough to 'go up higher.' Only it would
    be more right in me to be grateful than to talk so—now wouldn't it?


    And here is Mr. Kenyon's letter back again—a kind good letter ... a
    letter I have liked to read (so it was kind and good in you to let
    me!)—and he was with me to-day and praising the 'Ride to Ghent,' and
    praising the 'Duchess,' and praising you altogether as I liked to hear
    him. The Ghent-ride was 'very fine'—and the

Into the midnight they galloped abreast

drew us out into the night as witnesses. And then, the 'Duchess' ...
    the conception of it was noble, and the vehicle, rhythm and all, most
    characteristic and individual ... though some of the rhymes ... oh,
    some of the rhymes did not find grace in his ears—but the
    incantation-scene, 'just trenching on the supernatural,' that was
    taken to be 'wonderful,' ... 'showing extraordinary power, ... as
    indeed other things did ... works of a highly original writer and of
    such various faculty!'—Am I not tired of writing your praises as he
    said then? So I shall tell you, instead of any more, that I went down
    to the drawing-room yesterday (because it was warm enough) by an act
    of supererogatory virtue for which you may praise me in turn. What
    weather it is! and how the year seems to have forgotten itself into
    April.


    But after all, how have I answered your letter? and how are such
    letters to be answered? Do we answer the sun when he shines? May God
    bless you ... it is my answer—with one word besides ... that I am
    wholly and ever your

E.B.B.


    On Thursday as far as I know yet—and you shall hear if there should
    be an obstacle. Will you walk? If you will not, you know, you must
    be forgetting me a little. Will you remember me too in the act of the
    play?—but above all things in taking the right exercise, and in not
    overworking the head. And this for no serpent's reason.


