
Two letters in one—Wednesday.
[Post-mark, November 15, 1845.]


    I shall see you to-morrow and yet am writing what you will have to
    read perhaps. When you spoke of 'stars' and 'geniuses' in that letter,
    I did not seem to hear; I was listening to those words of the letter
    which were of a better silver in the sound than even your praise could
    be; and now that at last I come to hear them in their extravagance (oh
    such pure extravagance about 'glorious geniuses'—) I can't help
    telling you they were heard last, and deserved it.


    Shall I tell you besides?—The first moment in which I seemed to admit
    to myself in a flash of lightning the possibility of your affection
    for me being more than dream-work ... the first moment was that when
    you intimated (as you have done since repeatedly) that you cared for
    me not for a reason, but because you cared for me. Now such a
    'parceque' which reasonable people would take to be irrational, was
    just the only one fitted to the uses of my understanding on the
    particular question we were upon ... just the 'woman's reason'
    suitable to the woman ...; for I could understand that it might be as
    you said, and, if so, that it was altogether unanswerable ... do you
    see? If a fact includes its own cause ... why there it stands for
    ever—one of 'earth's immortalities'—as long as it includes it.


    And when unreasonableness stands for a reason, it is a promising state
    of things, we may both admit, and proves what it would be as well not
    too curiously to enquire into. But then ... to look at it in a
    brighter aspect, ... I do remember how, years ago, when talking the
    foolishnesses which women will talk when they are by themselves, and
    not forced to be sensible, ... one of my friends thought it 'safest to
    begin with a little aversion,' and another, wisest to begin with a
    great deal of esteem, and how the best attachments were produced so
    and so, ... I took it into my head to say that the best was where
    there was no cause at all for it, and the more wholly unreasonable,
    the better still; that the motive should lie in the feeling itself and
    not in the object of it—and that the affection which could (if it
    could) throw itself out on an idiot with a goître would be more
    admirable than Abelard's. Whereupon everybody laughed, and someone
    thought it affected of me and no true opinion, and others said plainly
    that it was immoral, and somebody else hoped, in a sarcasm, that I
    meant to act out my theory for the advantage of the world. To which I
    replied quite gravely that I had not virtue enough—and so, people
    laughed as it is fair to laugh when other people are esteemed to talk
    nonsense. And all this came back to me in the south wind of your
    'parceque,' and I tell it as it came ... now.


    Which proves, if it proves anything, ... while I have every sort of
    natural pleasure in your praises and like you to like my poetry just
    as I should, and perhaps more than I should; yet why it is all
    behind ... and in its place—and why I have a tendency moreover to
    sift and measure any praise of yours and to separate it from the
    superfluities, far more than with any other person's praise in the
    world.


    Friday evening.—Shall I send this letter or not? I have been 'tra
    'l si e 'l no,' and writing a new beginning on a new sheet even—but
    after all you ought to hear the remote echo of your last letter ...
    far out among the hills, ... as well as the immediate reverberation,
    and so I will send it,—and what I send is not to be answered,
    remember!


    I read Luria's first act twice through before I slept last night, and
    feel just as a bullet might feel, not because of the lead of it but
    because shot into the air and suddenly arrested and suspended. It
    ('Luria') is all life, and we know (that is, the reader knows) that
    there must be results here and here. How fine that sight of Luria is
    upon the lynx hides—how you see the Moor in him just in the glimpse
    you have by the eyes of another—and that laugh when the horse drops
    the forage, what wonderful truth and character you have in
    that!—And then, when he is in the scene—: 'Golden-hearted Luria'
    you called him once to me, and his heart shines already ... wide open
    to the morning sun. The construction seems to me very clear
    everywhere—and the rhythm, even over-smooth in a few verses, where
    you invert a little artificially—but that shall be set down on a
    separate strip of paper: and in the meantime I am snatched up into
    'Luria' and feel myself driven on to the ends of the poet, just as a
    reader should.


    But you are not driven on to any ends? so as to be tired, I mean?
    You will not suffer yourself to be overworked because you are
    'interested' in this work. I am so certain that the sensations in your
    head demand repose; and it must be so injurious to you to be
    perpetually calling, calling these new creations, one after another,
    that you must consent to be called to, and not hurry the next act,
    no, nor any act—let the people have time to learn the last number by
    heart. And how glad I am that Mr. Fox should say what he did of it ...
    though it wasn't true, you know ... not exactly. Still, I do hold that
    as far as construction goes, you never put together so much
    unquestionable, smooth glory before, ... not a single entanglement for
    the understanding ... unless 'the snowdrops' make an exception—while
    for the undeniableness of genius it never stood out before your
    readers more plainly than in that same number! Also you have extended
    your sweep of power—the sea-weed is thrown farther (if not higher)
    than it was found before; and one may calculate surely now how a few
    more waves will cover the brown stones and float the sight up away
    through the fissure of the rocks. The rhythm (to touch one of the
    various things) the rhythm of that 'Duchess' does more and more strike
    me as a new thing; something like (if like anything) what the Greeks
    called pedestrian-metre, ... between metre and prose ... the difficult
    rhymes combining too quite curiously with the easy looseness of the
    general measure. Then 'The Ride'—with that touch of natural feeling
    at the end, to prove that it was not in brutal carelessness that the
    poor horse was driven through all that suffering ... yes, and how that
    one touch of softness acts back upon the energy and resolution and
    exalts both, instead of weakening anything, as might have been
    expected by the vulgar of writers or critics. And then 'Saul'—and in
    a first place 'St. Praxed'—and for pure description, 'Fortú' and the
    deep 'Pictor Ignotus'—and the noble, serene 'Italy in England,' which
    grows on you the more you know of it—and that delightful 'Glove'—and
    the short lyrics ... for one comes to 'select' everything at last,
    and certainly I do like these poems better and better, as your poems
    are made to be liked. But you will be tired to hear it said over and
    over so, ... and I am going to 'Luria,' besides.


    When you write will you say exactly how you are? and will you write?
    And I want to explain to you that although I don't make a profession
    of equable spirits, (as a matter of temperament, my spirits were
    always given to rock a little, up and down) yet that I did not mean to
    be so ungrateful and wicked as to complain of low spirits now and to
    you. It would not be true either: and I said 'low' to express a merely
    bodily state. My opium comes in to keep the pulse from fluttering and
    fainting ... to give the right composure and point of balance to the
    nervous system. I don't take it for 'my spirits' in the usual sense;
    you must not think such a thing. The medical man who came to see me
    made me take it the other day when he was in the room, before the
    right hour and when I was talking quite cheerfully, just for the need
    he observed in the pulse. 'It was a necessity of my position,' he
    said. Also I do not suffer from it in any way, as people usually do
    who take opium. I am not even subject to an opium-headache. As to the
    low spirits I will not say that mine have not been low enough and
    with cause enough; but even then, ... why if you were to ask the
    nearest witnesses, ... say, even my own sisters, ... everybody would
    tell you, I think, that the 'cheerfulness' even then, was the
    remarkable thing in me—certainly it has been remarked about me again
    and again. Nobody has known that it was an effort (a habit of effort)
    to throw the light on the outside,—I do abhor so that ignoble
    groaning aloud of the 'groans of Testy and Sensitude'—yet I may say
    that for three years I never was conscious of one movement of pleasure
    in anything. Think if I could mean to complain of 'low spirits' now,
    and to you. Why it would be like complaining of not being able to see
    at noon—which would simply prove that I was very blind. And you, who
    are not blind, cannot make out what is written—so you need not try.
    May God bless you long after you have done blessing me!

Your own     

E.B.B.


    Now I am half tempted to tear this letter in two (and it is long
    enough for three) and to send you only the latter half. But you will
    understand—you will not think that there is a contradiction between
    the first and last ... you cannot. One is a truth of me—and the
    other a truth of you—and we two are different, you know.


    You are not over-working in 'Luria'? That you should not, is a
    truth, too.


    I observed that Mr. Kenyon put in 'Junior' to your address. Ought
    that to be done? or does my fashion of directing find you without
    hesitation?


    Mr. Kenyon asked me for Mr. Chorley's book, or you should have it.
    Shall I send it to you presently?


