
Sunday Morning.
[Post-mark, November 17, 1845.]


    At last your letter comes—and the deep joy—(I know and use to
    analyse my own feelings, and be sober in giving distinctive names to
    their varieties; this is deep joy,)—the true love with which I
    take this much of you into my heart, ... that proves what it is I
    wanted so long, and find at last, and am happy for ever. I must have
    more than 'intimated'—I must have spoken plainly out the truth, if I
    do myself the barest justice, and told you long ago that the
    admiration at your works went away, quite another way and afar from
    the love of you. If I could fancy some method of what I shall say
    happening without all the obvious stumbling-blocks of falseness, &c.
    which no foolish fancy dares associate with you ... if you could tell
    me when I next sit by you—'I will undeceive you,—I am not the Miss
    B.—she is up-stairs and you shall see her—I only wrote those
    letters, and am what you see, that is all now left you' (all the
    misapprehension having arisen from me, in some inexplicable way) ...
    I should not begin by saying anything, dear, dearest—but after
    that, I should assure you—soon make you believe that I did not much
    wonder at the event, for I have been all my life asking what
    connection there is between the satisfaction at the display of power,
    and the sympathy with—ever-increasing sympathy with—all imaginable
    weakness? Look now: Coleridge writes on and on,—at last he writes a
    note to his 'War-Eclogue,' in which he avers himself to have been
    actuated by a really—on the whole—benevolent feeling to Mr. Pitt
    when he wrote that stanza in which 'Fire' means to 'cling to him
    everlastingly'—where is the long line of admiration now that the end
    snaps? And now—here I refuse to fancy—you know whether, if you never
    write another line, speak another intelligible word, recognize me by a
    look again—whether I shall love you less or more ... more; having a
    right to expect more strength with the strange emergency. And it is
    because I know this, build upon this entirely, that as a reasonable
    creature, I am bound to look first to what hangs farthest and most
    loosely from me ... what might go from you to your loss, and so to
    mine, to say the least ... because I want all of you, not just so much
    as I could not live without—and because I see the danger of your
    entirely generous disposition and cannot quite, yet, bring myself to
    profit by it in the quiet way you recommend. Always remember, I never
    wrote to you, all the years, on the strength of your poetry, though I
    constantly heard of you through Mr. K. and was near seeing you once,
    and might have easily availed myself of his intervention to commend
    any letter to your notice, so as to reach you out of the foolish crowd
    of rushers-in upon genius ... who come and eat their bread and cheese
    on the high-altar, and talk of reverence without one of its surest
    instincts—never quiet till they cut their initials on the cheek of
    the Medicean Venus to prove they worship her. My admiration, as I
    said, went its natural way in silence—but when on my return to
    England in December, late in the month, Mr. K. sent those Poems to my
    sister, and I read my name there—and when, a day or two after, I met
    him and, beginning to speak my mind on them, and getting on no better
    than I should now, said quite naturally—'if I were to write this,
    now?'—and he assured me with his perfect kindness, you would be even
    'pleased' to hear from me under those circumstances ... nay,—for I
    will tell you all, in this, in everything—when he wrote me a note
    soon after to reassure me on that point ... then I did write, on
    account of my purely personal obligation, though of course taking
    that occasion to allude to the general and customary delight in your
    works: I did write, on the whole, unwillingly ... with consciousness
    of having to speak on a subject which I felt thoroughly
    concerning, and could not be satisfied with an imperfect expression
    of. As for expecting then what has followed ... I shall only say I was
    scheming how to get done with England and go to my heart in Italy. And
    now, my love—I am round you ... my whole life is wound up and down
    and over you.... I feel you stir everywhere. I am not conscious of
    thinking or feeling but about you, with some reference to you—so I
    will live, so may I die! And you have blessed me beyond the bond,
    in more than in giving me yourself to love; inasmuch as you believed
    me from the first ... what you call 'dream-work' was real of its
    kind, did you not think? and now you believe me, I believe and am
    happy, in what I write with my heart full of love for you. Why do you
    tell me of a doubt, as now, and bid me not clear it up, 'not answer
    you?' Have I done wrong in thus answering? Never, never do me direct
    wrong and hide for a moment from me what a word can explain as now.
    You see, you thought, if but for a moment, I loved your intellect—or
    what predominates in your poetry and is most distinct from your
    heart—better, or as well as you—did you not? and I have told you
    every thing,—explained everything ... have I not? And now I will dare
    ... yes, dearest, kiss you back to my heart again; my own. There—and
    there!


    And since I wrote what is above, I have been reading among other poems
    that sonnet—'Past and Future'—which affects me more than any poem I
    ever read. How can I put your poetry away from you, even in these
    ineffectual attempts to concentrate myself upon, and better apply
    myself to what remains?—poor, poor work it is; for is not that sonnet
    to be loved as a true utterance of yours? I cannot attempt to put down
    the thoughts that rise; may God bless me, as you pray, by letting that
    beloved hand shake the less ... I will only ask, the less ... for
    being laid on mine through this life! And, indeed, you write down, for
    me to calmly read, that I make you happy! Then it is—as with all
    power—God through the weakest instrumentality ... and I am past
    expression proud and grateful—My love,

I am your
R.B.


    I must answer your questions: I am better—and will certainly have
    your injunction before my eyes and work quite moderately. Your letters
    come straight to me—my father's go to Town, except on extraordinary
    occasions, so that all come for my first looking-over. I saw Mr. K.
    last night at the Amateur Comedy—and heaps of old acquaintances—and
    came home tired and savage—and yearned literally, for a letter this
    morning, and so it came and I was well again. So, I am not even to
    have your low spirits leaning on mine? It was just because I always
    find you alike, and ever like yourself, that I seemed to discern a
    depth, when you spoke of 'some days' and what they made uneven where
    all is agreeable to me. Do not, now, deprive me of a right—a right
    ... to find you as you are; get no habit of being cheerful with
    me—I have universal sympathy and can show you a side of me, a true
    face, turn as you may. If you are cheerful ... so will I be ... if
    sad, my cheerfulness will be all the while behind, and propping up,
    any sadness that meets yours, if that should be necessary. As for my
    question about the opium ... you do not misunderstand that neither:
    I trust in the eventual consummation of my—shall I not say,
    our—hopes; and all that bears upon your health immediately or
    prospectively, affects me—how it affects me! Will you write again?
    Wednesday, remember! Mr. K. wants me to go to him one of the three
    next days after. I will bring you some letters ... one from Landor.
    Why should I trouble you about 'Pomfret.'


    And Luria ... does it so interest you? Better is to come of it. How
    you lift me up!—


