
Monday.
[Post-mark, November 18, 1845.]


    How you overcome me as always you do—and where is the answer to
    anything except too deep down in the heart for even the pearl-divers?
    But understand ... what you do not quite ... that I did not mistake
    you as far even as you say here and even 'for a moment.' I did not
    write any of that letter in a 'doubt' of you—not a word.... I was
    simply looking back in it on my own states of feeling, ... looking
    back from that point of your praise to what was better ... (or I
    should not have looked back)—and so coming to tell you, by a natural
    association, how the completely opposite point to that of any praise
    was the one which struck me first and most, viz. the no-reason of your
    reasoning ... acknowledged to be yours. Of course I acknowledge it to
    be yours, ... that high reason of no reason—I acknowledged it to be
    yours (didn't I?) in acknowledging that it made an impression on me.
    And then, referring to the traditions of my experience such as I told
    them to you, I meant, so, farther to acknowledge that I would rather
    be cared for in that unreasonable way, than for the best reason in
    the world. But all that was history and philosophy simply—was it
    not?—and not doubt of you.


    The truth is ... since we really are talking truths in this world ...
    that I never have doubted you—ah, you know!—I felt from the
    beginning so sure of the nobility and integrity in you that I would
    have trusted you to make a path for my soul—that, you know. I
    felt certain that you believed of yourself every word you spoke or
    wrote—and you must not blame me if I thought besides sometimes (it
    was the extent of my thought) that you were self-deceived as to the
    nature of your own feelings. If you could turn over every page of my
    heart like the pages of a book, you would see nothing there offensive
    to the least of your feelings ... not even to the outside fringes of
    your man's vanity ... should you have any vanity like a man; which I
    do doubt. I never wronged you in the least of things—never ... I
    thank God for it. But 'self-deceived,' it was so easy for you to be:
    see how on every side and day by day, men are—and women too—in this
    sort of feelings. 'Self-deceived,' it was so possible for you to be,
    and while I thought it possible, could I help thinking it best for
    you that it should be so—and was it not right in me to persist in
    thinking it possible? It was my reverence for you that made me
    persist! What was I that I should think otherwise? I had been shut
    up here too long face to face with my own spirit, not to know myself,
    and, so, to have lost the common illusions of vanity. All the men I
    had ever known could not make your stature among them. So it was not
    distrust, but reverence rather. I sate by while the angel stirred the
    water, and I called it Miracle. Do not blame me now, ... my angel!


    Nor say, that I 'do not lean' on you with all the weight of my 'past'
    ... because I do! You cannot guess what you are to me—you cannot—it
    is not possible:—and though I have said that before, I must say it
    again ... for it comes again to be said. It is something to me between
    dream and miracle, all of it—as if some dream of my earliest
    brightest dreaming-time had been lying through these dark years to
    steep in the sunshine, returning to me in a double light. Can it be,
    I say to myself, that you feel for me so? can it be meant for me?
    this from you?


    If it is your 'right' that I should be gloomy at will with you, you
    exercise it, I do think—for although I cannot promise to be very
    sorrowful when you come, (how could that be?) yet from different
    motives it seems to me that I have written to you quite superfluities
    about my 'abomination of desolation,'—yes indeed, and blamed myself
    afterwards. And now I must say this besides. When grief came upon
    grief, I never was tempted to ask 'How have I deserved this of God,'
    as sufferers sometimes do: I always felt that there must be cause
    enough ... corruption enough, needing purification ... weakness
    enough, needing strengthening ... nothing of the chastisement could
    come to me without cause and need. But in this different hour, when
    joy follows joy, and God makes me happy, as you say, through you ...
    I cannot repress the ... 'How have I deserved this of Him?'—I know
    I have not—I know I do not.


    Could it be that heart and life were devastated to make room for
    you?—If so, it was well done,—dearest! They leave the ground fallow
    before the wheat.


    'Were you wrong in answering?' Surely not ... unless it is wrong to
    show all this goodness ... and too much, it may be for me. When the
    plants droop for drought and the copious showers fall suddenly, silver
    upon silver, they die sometimes of the reverse of their adversities.
    But no—that, even, shall not be a danger! And if I said 'Do not
    answer,' I did not mean that I would not have a doubt removed—(having
    no doubt!—) but I was simply unwilling to seem to be asking for
    golden words ... going down the aisles with that large silken purse,
    as quêteuse. Try to understand.


    On Wednesday then!—George is invited to meet you on Thursday at Mr.
    Kenyon's.


    The Examiner speaks well, upon the whole, and with allowances ...
    oh, that absurdity about metaphysics apart from poetry!—'Can such
    things be' in one of the best reviews of the day? Mr. Kenyon was here
    on Sunday and talking of the poems with real living tears in his eyes
    and on his cheeks. But I will tell you. 'Luria' is to climb to the
    place of a great work, I see. And if I write too long letters, is it
    not because you spoil me, and because (being spoilt) I cannot help
    it?—May God bless you always—

Your           

E.B.B.


