
Thursday.
[Post-mark, November 21, 1845.]


    Thank you! and will you, if your sister made the copy of Landor's
    verses for me as well as for you, thank her from me for another
    kindness, ... not the second nor the third? For my own part, be sure
    that if I did not fall on the right subtle interpretation about the
    letters, at least I did not 'think it vain' of you! vain: when,
    supposing you really to have been over-gratified by such letters, it
    could have proved only an excess of humility!—But ... besides the
    subtlety,—you meant to be kind to me, you know,—and I had a
    pleasure and an interest in reading them—only that ... mind. Sir John
    Hanmer's, I was half angry with! Now is he not cold?—and is it not
    easy to see why he is forced to write his own scenes five times over
    and over? He might have mentioned the 'Duchess' I think; and he a
    poet! Mr. Chorley speaks some things very well—but what does he mean
    about 'execution,' en revanche? but I liked his letter and his
    candour in the last page of it. Will Mr. Warburton review you? does he
    mean that? Now do let me see any other letters you receive. May I?
    Of course Landor's 'dwells apart' from all: and besides the reason you
    give for being gratified by it, it is well that one prophet should
    open his mouth and prophesy and give his witness to the inspiration of
    another. See what he says in the letter.... 'You may stand quite
    alone if you will—and I think you will.' That is a noble testimony
    to a truth. And he discriminates—he understands and discerns—they
    are not words thrown out into the air. The 'profusion of imagery
    covering the depth of thought' is a true description. And, in the
    verses, he lays his finger just on your characteristics—just on those
    which, when you were only a poet to me, (only a poet: does it sound
    irreverent? almost, I think!) which, when you were only a poet to me,
    I used to study, characteristic by characteristic, and turn myself
    round and round in despair of being ever able to approach, taking them
    to be so essentially and intensely masculine that like effects were
    unattainable, even in a lower degree, by any female hand. Did I not
    tell you so once before? or oftener than once? And must not these
    verses of Landor's be printed somewhere—in the Examiner? and again
    in the Athenæum? if in the Examiner, certainly again in the
    Athenæum—it would be a matter of course. Oh those verses: how they
    have pleased me! It was an act worthy of him—and of you.


    George has been properly 'indoctrinated,' and, we must hope, will do
    credit to my instructions. Just now ... just as I was writing ... he
    came in to say good-morning and good-night (he goes to chambers
    earlier than I receive visitors generally), and to ask with a smile,
    if I had 'a message for my friend' ... that was you ... and so he
    was indoctrinated. He is good and true, honest and kind, but a little
    over-grave and reasonable, as I and my sisters complain continually.
    The great Law lime-kiln dries human souls all to one colour—and he is
    an industrious reader among law books and knows a good deal about
    them, I have heard from persons who can judge; but with a sacrifice of
    impulsiveness and liberty of spirit, which I should regret for him
    if he sate on the Woolsack even. Oh—that law! how I do detest it! I
    hate it and think ill of it—I tell George so sometimes—and he is
    good-natured and only thinks to himself (a little audibly now and
    then) that I am a woman and talking nonsense. But the morals of it,
    and the philosophy of it! And the manners of it! in which the whole
    host of barristers looks down on the attorneys and the rest of the
    world!—how long are these things to last!


    Theodosia Garrow, I have seen face to face once or twice. She is very
    clever—very accomplished—with talents and tastes of various kinds—a
    musician and linguist, in most modern languages I believe—and a
    writer of fluent graceful melodious verses, ... you cannot say any
    more. At least I cannot—and though I have not seen this last poem
    in the 'Book of Beauty,' I have no more trust ready for it than for
    its predecessors, of which Mr. Landor said as much. It is the personal
    feeling which speaks in him, I fancy—simply the personal
    feeling—and, that being the case, it does not spoil the
    discriminating appreciation on the other page of this letter. I might
    have the modesty to admit besides that I may be wrong and he, right,
    all through. But ... 'more intense than Sappho'!—more intense than
    intensity itself!—to think of that!—Also the word 'poetry' has a
    clear meaning to me, and all the fluency and facility and quick
    ear-catching of a tune which one can find in the world, do not answer
    to it—no.


    How is the head? will you tell me? I have written all this without a
    word of it, and yet ever since yesterday I have been uneasy, ... I
    cannot help it. You see you are not better but worse. 'Since you were
    in Italy'—Then is it England that disagrees with you? and is it
    change away from England that you want? ... require, I mean. If
    so—why what follows and ought to follow? You must not be ill
    indeed—that is the first necessity. Tell me how you are, exactly
    how you are; and remember to walk, and not to work too much—for my
    sake—if you care for me—if it is not too bold of me to say so. I had
    fancied you were looking better rather than otherwise: but those
    sensations in the head are frightful and ought to be stopped by
    whatever means; even by the worst, as they would seem to me.
    Well—it was bad news to hear of the increase of pain; for the
    amendment was a 'passing show' I fear, and not caused even by thoughts
    of mine or it would have appeared before; while on the other side (the
    sunny side of the way) I heard on that same yesterday, what made me
    glad as good news, a whole gospel of good news, and from you too who
    profess to say 'less than nothing,' and that was that 'the times
    seemed longer to you':—do you remember saying it? And it made me
    glad ... happy—perhaps too glad and happy—and surprised: yes,
    surprised!—for if you had told me (but you would not have told me) if
    you had let me guess ... just the contrary, ... 'that the times
    seemed shorter,' ... why it would have seemed to me as natural as
    nature—oh, believe me it would, and I could not have thought hardly
    of you for it in the most secret or silent of my thoughts. How am I
    to feel towards you, do you imagine, ... who have the world round you
    and yet make me this to you? I never can tell you how, and you never
    can know it without having my heart in you with all its experiences:
    we measure by those weights. May God bless you! and save me from
    being the cause to you of any harm or grief!... I choose it for my
    blessing instead of another. What should I be if I could fail
    willingly to you in the least thing? But I never will, and you know
    it. I will not move, nor speak, nor breathe, so as willingly and
    consciously to touch, with one shade of wrong, that precious deposit
    of 'heart and life' ... which may yet be recalled.


    And, so, may God bless you and your

E.B.B.


    Remember to say how you are.


    I sent 'Pomfret'—and Shelley is returned, and the letters, in the
    same parcel—but my letter goes by the post as you see. Is there
    contrast enough between the two rival female personages of 'Pomfret.'
    I fancy not. Helena should have been more 'demonstrative' than she
    appeared in Italy, to secure the 'new modulation' with Walter. But you
    will not think it a strong book, I am sure, with all the good and pure
    intention of it. The best character ... most life-like ... as
    conventional life goes ... seems to me 'Mr. Rose' ... beyond all
    comparison—and the best point, the noiseless, unaffected manner in
    which the acting out of the 'private judgment' in Pomfret himself is
    made no heroic virtue but simply an integral part of the love of
    truth. As to Grace she is too good to be interesting, I am afraid—and
    people say of her more than she expresses—and as to 'generosity,' she
    could not do otherwise in the last scenes.


    But I will not tell you the story after all.


    At the beginning of this letter I meant to write just one page; but my
    generosity is like Grace's, and could not help itself. There were the
    letters to write of, and the verses! and then, you know, 'femme qui
    parle' never has done. Let me hear! and I will be as brisk as a
    monument next time for variety.


