
Friday Night.
[Post-mark, November 22, 1845.]


    How good and kind to send me these books! (The letter I say nothing
    of, according to convention: if I wrote down 'best and kindest' ...
    oh, what poorest words!) I shall tell you all about 'Pomfret,' be
    sure. Chorley talked of it, as we walked homewards together last
    night,—modestly and well, and spoke of having given away two copies
    only ... to his mother one, and the other to—Miss Barrett, and 'she
    seemed interested in the life of it, entered into his purpose in it,'
    and I listened to it all, loving Chorley for his loveability which is
    considerable at other times, and saying to myself what might run
    better in the child's couplet—'Not more than others I deserve, Though
    God has given me more'!—Given me the letter which expresses surprise
    that I shall feel these blanks between the days when I see you longer
    and longer! So am I surprised—that I should have mentioned so
    obvious a matter at all; or leave unmentioned a hundred others its
    correlatives which I cannot conceive you to be ignorant of, you! When
    I spread out my riches before me, and think what the hour and more
    means that you endow one with, I do—not to say could—I do form
    resolutions, and say to myself—'If next time I am bidden stay away a
    fortnight, I will not reply by a word beyond the grateful assent.' I
    do, God knows, lay up in my heart these priceless treasures,—shall
    I tell you? I never in my life kept a journal, a register of sights,
    or fancies, or feelings; in my last travel I put down on a slip of
    paper a few dates, that I might remember in England, on such a day I
    was on Vesuvius, in Pompeii, at Shelley's grave; all that should be
    kept in memory is, with me, best left to the brain's own process.
    But I have, from the first, recorded the date and the duration of
    every visit to you; the numbers of minutes you have given me ... and I
    put them together till they make ... nearly two days now;
    four-and-twenty-hour-long-days, that I have been by you—and I enter
    the room determining to get up and go sooner ... and I go away into
    the light street repenting that I went so soon by I don't know how
    many minutes—for, love, what is it all, this love for you, but an
    earnest desiring to include you in myself, if that might be; to feel
    you in my very heart and hold you there for ever, through all chance
    and earthly changes!


    There, I had better leave off; the words!


    I was very glad to find myself with your brother yesterday; I like him
    very much and mean to get a friend in him—(to supply the loss of my
    friend ... Miss Barrett—which is gone, the friendship, so gone!) But
    I did not ask after you because I heard Moxon do it. Now of Landor's
    verses: I got a note from Forster yesterday telling me that he, too,
    had received a copy ... so that there is no injunction to be secret.
    So I got a copy for dear Mr. Kenyon, and, lo! what comes! I send the
    note to make you smile! I shall reply that I felt in duty bound to
    apprise you; as I did. You will observe that I go to that too facile
    gate of his on Tuesday, my day ... from your house directly. The
    worst is that I have got entangled with invitations already, and must
    go out again, hating it, to more than one place.


    I am very well—quite well; yes, dearest! The pain is quite gone;
    and the inconvenience, hard on its trace. You will write to me again,
    will you not? And be as brief as your heart lets you, to me who hoard
    up your words and get remote and imperfect ideas of what ... shall it
    be written?... anger at you could mean, when I see a line blotted out;
    a second-thoughted finger-tip rapidly put forth upon one of my gold
    pieces!


    I rather think if Warburton reviews me it will be in the Quarterly,
    which I know he writes for. Hanmer is a very sculpturesque passionless
    high-minded and amiable man ... this coldness, as you see it, is part
    of him. I like his poems, I think, better than you—'the Sonnets,' do
    you know them? Not 'Fra Cipolla.' See what is here, since you will not
    let me have only you to look at—this is Landor's first
    opinion—expressed to Forster—see the date! and last of all, see me
    and know me, beloved! May God bless you!


