
Saturday.
[Post-mark, November 22, 1845.]


    Mr. Kenyon came yesterday—and do you know when he took out those
    verses and spoke his preface and I understood what was to follow, I
    had a temptation from my familiar Devil not to say I had read them
    before—I had the temptation strong and clear. For he (Mr. K.) told me
    that your sister let him see them—.


    But no—My 'vade retro' prevailed, and I spoke the truth and shamed
    the devil and surprised Mr. Kenyon besides, as I could observe. Not an
    observation did he make till he was just going away half an hour
    afterwards, and then he said rather dryly ... 'And now may I ask how
    long ago it was when you first read these verses?—was it a fortnight
    ago?' It was better, I think, that I should not have made a mystery of
    such a simple thing, ... and yet I felt half vexed with myself and
    with him besides. But the verses,—how he praised them! more than I
    thought of doing ... as verses—though there is beauty and music and
    all that ought to be. Do you see clearly now that the latter lines
    refer to the combination in you,—the qualities over and above those
    held in common with Chaucer? And I have heard this morning from two or
    three of the early readers of the Chronicle (I never care to see it
    till the evening) that the verses are there—so that my wishes have
    fulfilled themselves there at least—strangely, for wishes of mine
    ... which generally 'go by contraries' as the soothsayers declare of
    dreams. How kind of you to send me the fragment to Mr. Forster! and
    how I like to read it. Was the Hebrew yours then ... written then,
    I mean ... or written now?


    Mr. Kenyon told me that you were to dine with him on Tuesday, and I
    took for granted, at first hearing, that you would come on Wednesday
    perhaps to me—and afterwards I saw the possibility of the two ends
    being joined without much difficulty. Still, I was not sure, before
    your letter came, how it might be.


    That you really are better is the best news of all—thank you for
    telling me. It will be wise not to go out too much—'aequam servare
    mentem' as Landor quotes, ... in this as in the rest. Perhaps that
    worst pain was a sort of crisis ... the sharp turn of the road about
    to end ... oh, I do trust it may be so.


    Mr. K. wrote to Landor to the effect that it was not because he (Mr.
    K.) held you in affection, nor because the verses expressed critically
    the opinion entertained of you by all who could judge, nor because
    they praised a book with which his own name was associated ... but for
    the abstract beauty of those verses ... for that reason he could not
    help naming them to Mr. Landor. All of which was repeated to me
    yesterday.


    Also I heard of you from George, who admired you—admired you ... as
    if you were a chancellor in posse, a great lawyer in esse—and
    then he thought you ... what he never could think a lawyer ...
    'unassuming.' And you ... you are so kind! Only that makes me
    think bitterly what I have thought before, but cannot write to-day.


    It was good-natured of Mr. Chorley to send me a copy of his book, and
    he sending so few—very! George who admires you, does not tolerate
    Mr. Chorley ... (did I tell ever?) declares that the affectation is
    'bad,' and that there is a dash of vulgarity ... which I positively
    refuse to believe, and should, I fancy, though face to face with the
    most vainglorious of waistcoats. How can there be vulgarity even of
    manners, with so much mental refinement? I never could believe in
    those combinations of contradictions.


    'An obvious matter,' you think! as obvious, as your 'green hill' ...
    which I cannot see. For the rest ... my thought upon your 'great
    fact' of the 'two days,' is quite different from yours ... for I
    think directly, 'So little'! so dreadfully little! What shallow earth
    for a deep root! What can be known of me in that time? 'So there, is
    the only good, you see, that comes from making calculations on a slip
    of paper! It is not and it cannot come to good.' I would rather look
    at my seventy-five letters—there is room to breathe in them. And this
    is my idea (ecce!) of monumental brevity—and hic jacet at last

Your E.B.B.


