
Sunday Night.
[Post-mark, November 24, 1845.]


    But a word to-night, my love—for my head aches a little,—I had to
    write a long letter to my friend at New Zealand, and now I want to sit
    and think of you and get well—but I must not quite lose the word I
    counted on.


    So, that way you will take my two days and turn them against me?
    Oh, you! Did I say the 'root' had been striking then, or rather,
    that the seeds, whence the roots take leisure and grow, they had
    been planted then—and might not a good heart and hand drop acorns
    enough to grow up into a complete Dodona-grove,—when the very rook,
    say farmers, hides and forgets whole navies of ship-wood one day to
    be, in his summer storing-journeys? But this shall do—I am not going
    to prove what may be, when here it is, to my everlasting
    happiness.


    —And 'I am kind'—there again! Do I not know what you mean by that?
    Well it is some comfort that you make all even in some degree, and
    take from my faculties here what you give them, spite of my
    protesting, in other directions. So I could not when I first saw you
    admire you very much, and wish for your friendship, and be willing to
    give you mine, and desirous of any opportunity of serving you,
    benefiting you; I could not think the finding myself in a position to
    feel this, just this and no more, a sufficiently fortunate event ...
    but I must needs get up, or imitate, or ... what is it you fancy I do?
    ... an utterly distinct, unnecessary, inconsequential regard for you,
    which should, when it got too hard for shamming at the week's
    end,—should simply spoil, in its explosion and departure, all the
    real and sufficing elements of an honest life-long attachment and
    affections! that I should do this, and think it a piece of kindness
    does....


    Now, I'll tell you what it does deserve, and what it shall get. Give
    me, dearest beyond expression, what I have always dared to think I
    would ask you for ... one day! Give me ... wait—for your own sake,
    not mine who never, never dream of being worth such a gift ... but for
    your own sense of justice, and to say, so as my heart shall hear,
    that you were wrong and are no longer so, give me so much of you—all
    precious that you are—as may be given in a lock of your hair—I will
    live and die with it, and with the memory of you—this at the
    worst! If you give me what I beg,—shall I say next Tuesday ... when
    I leave you, I will not speak a word. If you do not, I will not think
    you unjust, for all my light words, but I will pray you to wait and
    remember me one day—when the power to deserve more may be greater ...
    never the will. God supplies all things: may he bless you, beloved! So
    I can but pray, kissing your hand.

R.B.


    Now pardon me, dearest, for what is written ... what I cannot cancel,
    for the love's sake that it grew from.


    The Chronicle was through Moxon, I believe—Landor had sent the
    verses to Forster at the same time as to me, yet they do not appear. I
    never in my life less cared about people's praise or blame for myself,
    and never more for its influence on other people than now—I would
    stand as high as I could in the eyes of all about you—yet not, after
    all, at poor Chorley's expense whom your brother, I am sure,
    unintentionally, is rather hasty in condemning; I have told you of my
    own much rasher opinion and how I was ashamed and sorry when I
    corrected it after. C. is of a different species to your brother,
    differently trained, looking different ways—and for some of the
    peculiarities that strike at first sight, C. himself gives a good
    reason to the enquirer on better acquaintance. For 'Vulgarity'—NO!
    But your kind brother will alter his view, I know, on further
    acquaintance ... and,—woe's me—will find that 'assumption's' pertest
    self would be troubled to exercise its quality at such a house as Mr.
    K.'s, where every symptom of a proper claim is met half way and helped
    onward far too readily.


    Good night, now. Am I not yours—are you not mine? And can that make
    you happy too?


    Bless you once more and for ever.


    That scrap of Landor's being for no other eye than mine—I made the
    foolish comment, that there was no blotting out—made it some four or
    five years ago, when I could read what I only guess at now, through my
    idle opening the hand and letting the caught bird go—but there used
    to be a real satisfaction to me in writing those grand Hebrew
    characters—the noble languages!


