
Monday.
[Post-mark, November 24, 1845.]


    But what unlawful things have I said about 'kindness'? I did not mean
    any harm—no, indeed! And as to thinking ... as to having ever
    thought, that you could 'imitate' (can this word be 'imitate'?) an
    unfelt feeling or a feeling unsupposed to be felt ... I may solemnly
    assure you that I never, never did so. 'Get up'—'imitate'!! But it
    was the contrary ... all the contrary! From the beginning, now did
    I not believe you too much? Did I not believe you even in your
    contradiction of yourself ... in your yes and no on the same
    subject, ... and take the world to be turning round backwards and
    myself to have been shut up here till I grew mad, ... rather than
    disbelieve you either way? Well!—You know it as well as I can tell
    you, and I will not, any more. If I have been 'wrong,' it was not so
    ... nor indeed then ... it is not so, though it is now, perhaps.


    Therefore ... but wait! I never gave away what you ask me to give
    you, to a human being, except my nearest relatives and once or twice
    or thrice to female friends, ... never, though reproached for it; and
    it is just three weeks since I said last to an asker that I was 'too
    great a prude for such a thing'! it was best to anticipate the
    accusation!—And, prude or not, I could not—I never
    could—something would not let me. And now ... what am I to do ...
    'for my own sake and not yours?' Should you have it, or not? Why I
    suppose ... yes. I suppose that 'for my own sense of justice and in
    order to show that I was wrong' (which is wrong—you wrote a wrong
    word there ... 'right,' you meant!) 'to show that I was right and am
    no longer so,' ... I suppose you must have it, 'Oh, You,' ... who
    have your way in everything! Which does not mean ... Oh, vous, qui
    avez toujours raison—far from it.


    Also ... which does not mean that I shall give you what you ask for,
    to-morrow,—because I shall not—and one of my conditions is (with
    others to follow) that not a word be said to-morrow, you understand.
    Some day I will send it perhaps ... as you knew I should ... ah, as
    you knew I should ... notwithstanding that 'getting up' ... that
    'imitation' ... of humility: as you knew too well I should!


    Only I will not teaze you as I might perhaps; and now that your
    headache has begun again—the headache again: the worse than headache!
    See what good my wishes do! And try to understand that if I speak of
    my being 'wrong' now in relation to you ... of my being right before,
    and wrong now, ... I mean wrong for your sake, and not for mine ...
    wrong in letting you come out into the desert here to me, you whose
    place is by the waters of Damascus. But I need not tell you over
    again—you know. May God bless you till to-morrow and past it for
    ever. Mr. Kenyon brought me your note yesterday to read about the
    'order in the button-hole'—ah!—or 'oh, you,' may I not re-echo? It
    enrages me to think of Mr. Forster; publishing too as he does, at a
    moment, the very sweepings of Landor's desk! Is the motive of the
    reticence to be looked for somewhere among the cinders?—Too bad it
    is. So, till to-morrow! and you shall not be 'kind' any more.

Your
E.B.B.


    But how, 'a foolish comment'? Good and true rather! And I admired
    the writing21 ... worthy of the reeds of Jordan!


