
Monday Evening.
[Post-mark, November 27, 1845.]


    Now you must not blame me—you must not. To make a promise is one
    thing, and to keep it, quite another: and the conclusion you see 'as
    from a tower.' Suppose I had an oath in heaven somewhere ... near to
    'coma Berenices,' ... never to give you what you ask for! ... would
    not such an oath be stronger than a mere half promise such as I sent
    you a few hours ago? Admit that it would—and that I am not to blame
    for saying now ... (listen!) that I never can nor will give you
    this thing;—only that I will, if you please, exchange it for another
    thing—you understand. I too will avoid being 'assuming'; I will not
    pretend to be generous, no, nor 'kind.' It shall be pure merchandise
    or nothing at all. Therefore determine!—remembering always how our
    'ars poetica,' after Horace, recommends 'dare et petere
    vicissim'—which is making a clatter of pedantry to take advantage of
    the noise ... because perhaps I ought to be ashamed to say this to
    you, and perhaps I am! ... yet say it none the less.


    And ... less lightly ... if you have right and reason on your side,
    may I not have a little on mine too? And shall I not care, do you
    think?... Think!


    Then there is another reason for me, entirely mine. You have come to
    me as a dream comes, as the best dreams come ... dearest—and so there
    is need to me of 'a sign' to know the difference between dream and
    vision—and that is my completest reason, my own reason—you have
    none like it; none. A ticket to know the horn-gate from the ivory, ...
    ought I not to have it? Therefore send it to me before I send you
    anything, and if possible by that Lewisham post which was the most
    frequent bringer of your letters until these last few came, and which
    reaches me at eight in the evening when all the world is at dinner and
    my solitude most certain. Everything is so still then, that I have
    heard the footsteps of a letter of yours ten doors off ... or more,
    perhaps. Now beware of imagining from this which I say, that there is
    a strict police for my correspondence ... (it is not so—) nor that I
    do not like hearing from you at any and every hour: it is so. Only I
    would make the smoothest and sweetest of roads for ... and you
    understand, and do not imagine beyond.


    Tuesday evening.—What is written is written, ... all the above: and
    it is forbidden to me to write a word of what I could write down here
    ... forbidden for good reasons. So I am silent on conditions ...
    those being ... first ... that you never do such things again ... no,
    you must not and shall not.... I will not let it be: and secondly,
    that you try to hear the unspoken words, and understand how your gift
    will remain with me while I remain ... they need not be said—just
    as it need not have been so beautiful, for that. The beauty drops
    'full fathom five' into the deep thought which covers it. So I study
    my Machiavelli to contrive the possibility of wearing it, without
    being put to the question violently by all the curiosity of all my
    brothers;—the questions 'how' ... 'what' ... 'why' ... put round and
    edgeways. They are famous, some of them, for asking questions. I say
    to them—'well: how many more questions?' And now ... for me—have
    I said a word?—have I not been obedient? And by rights and in
    justice, there should have been a reproach ... if there could!
    Because, friendship or more than friendship, Pisa or no Pisa, it was
    unnecessary altogether from you to me ... but I have done, and you
    shall not be teazed.


    Wednesday.—Only ... I persist in the view of the other question.
    This will not do for the 'sign,' ... this, which, so far from being
    qualified for disproving a dream, is the beautiful image of a dream in
    itself ... so beautiful: and with the very shut eyelids, and the
    "little folding of the hands to sleep." You see at a glance it will
    not do. And so—


    Just as one might be interrupted while telling a fairy-tale, ... in
    the midst of the "and so's" ... just so, I have been interrupted by
    the coming in of Miss Bayley, and here she has been sitting for nearly
    two hours, from twelve to two nearly, and I like her, do you know. Not
    only she talks well, which was only a thing to expect, but she seems
    to feel ... to have great sensibility—and her kindness to me ...
    kindness of manner and words and expression, all together ... quite
    touched me.—I did not think of her being so loveable a person. Yet it
    was kind and generous, her proposition about Italy; (did I tell you
    how she made it to me through Mr. Kenyon long ago—when I was a mere
    stranger to her?) the proposition to go there with me herself. It was
    quite a grave, earnest proposal of hers—which was one of the reasons
    why I could not even wish not to see her to-day. Because you see, it
    was a tremendous degree of experimental generosity, to think of going
    to Italy by sea with an invalid stranger, "seule à seule." And she
    was wholly in earnest, wholly. Is there not good in the world after
    all?


    Tell me how you are, for I am not at ease about you—You were not well
    even yesterday, I thought. If this goes on ... but it mustn't go
    on—oh, it must not. May God bless us more!


    Do not fancy, in the meantime, that you stay here 'too long' for any
    observation that can be made. In the first place there is nobody to
    'observe'—everybody is out till seven, except the one or two who will
    not observe if I tell them not. My sisters are glad when you come,
    because it is a gladness of mine, ... they observe. I have a great
    deal of liberty, to have so many chains; we all have, in this house:
    and though the liberty has melancholy motives, it saves some daily
    torment, and I do not complain of it for one.


    May God bless you! Do not forget me. Say how you are. What good can I
    do you with all my thoughts, when you keep unwell? See!—Facts are
    against fancies. As when I would not have the lamp lighted yesterday
    because it seemed to make it later, and you proved directly that it
    would not make it earlier, by getting up and going away!

Wholly and ever your
E.B.B.


