
[Post-mark, November 28, 1845.]


    Take it, dearest; what I am forced to think you mean—and take no
    more with it—for I gave all to give long ago—I am all yours—and
    now, mine; give me mine to be happy with!


    You will have received my note of yesterday.—I am glad you are
    satisfied with Miss Bayley, whom I, too, thank ... that is, sympathize
    with, ... (not wonder at, though)—for her intention.... Well, may it
    all be for best—here or at Pisa, you are my blessing and life.


    ... How all considerate you are, you that are the kind, kind one!
    The post arrangement I will remember—to-day, for instance, will this
    reach you at 8? I shall be with you then, in thought. 'Forget
    you!'—What does that mean, dearest?


    And I might have stayed longer and you let me go. What does that
    mean, also tell me? Why, I make up my mind to go, always, like a man,
    and praise myself as I get through it—as when one plunges into the
    cold water—only ... ah, that too is no more a merit than any other
    thing I do ... there is the reward, the last and best! Or is it the
    'lure'?


    I would not be ashamed of my soul if it might be shown you,—it is
    wholly grateful, conscious of you.


    But another time, do not let me wrong myself so! Say, 'one minute
    more.'


    On Monday?—I am much better—and, having got free from an
    engagement for Saturday, shall stay quietly here and think the post
    never intending to come—for you will not let me wait longer?


    Shall I dare write down a grievance of my heart, and not offend you?
    Yes, trusting in the right of my love—you tell me, sweet, here in the
    letter, 'I do not look so well'—and sometimes, I 'look better' ...
    how do you know? When I first saw you—I saw your eyes—since
    then, you, it should appear, see mine—but I only know yours are
    there, and have to use that memory as if one carried dried flowers
    about when fairly inside the garden-enclosure. And while I resolve,
    and hesitate, and resolve again to complain of this—(kissing your
    foot ... not boldly complaining, nor rudely)—while I have this on my
    mind, on my heart, ever since that May morning ... can it be?


    —No, nothing can be wrong now—you will never call me 'kind' again,
    in that sense, you promise! Nor think 'bitterly' of my kindness, that
    word!


    Shall I see you on Monday?


    God bless you my dearest—I see her now—and here and now the eyes
    open, wide enough, and I will kiss them—how gratefully!

Your own
R.B.


