
Friday.
[Post-mark, December 1, 1845.]


    It comes at eight o'clock—the post says eight ... I say nearer half
    past eight ... it comes—and I thank you, thank you, as I can. Do
    you remember the purple lock of a king on which hung the fate of a
    city? I do! And I need not in conscience—because this one here did
    not come to me by treason—'ego et rex meus,' on the contrary, do
    fairly give and take.


    I meant at first only to send you what is in the ring ... which, by
    the way, will not fit you I know—(not certainly in the finger which
    it was meant for ...) as it would not Napoleon before you—but can
    easily be altered to the right size.... I meant at first to send you
    only what was in the ring: but your fashion is best so you shall have
    it both ways. Now don't say a word on Monday ... nor at all. As for
    the ring, recollect that I am forced to feel blindfold into the outer
    world, and take what is nearest ... by chance, not choice ... or it
    might have been better—a little better—perhaps. The best of it is
    that it's the colour of your blue flowers. Now you will not say a
    word—I trust to you.


    It is enough that you should have said these others, I think. Now is
    it just of you? isn't it hard upon me? And if the charge is true,
    whose fault is it, pray? I have been ashamed and vexed with myself
    fifty times for being so like a little girl, ... for seeming to have
    'affectations'; and all in vain: 'it was stronger than I,' as the
    French say. And for you to complain! As if Haroun Alraschid after
    cutting off a head, should complain of the want of an
    obeisance!—Well!—I smile notwithstanding. Nobody can help
    smiling—both for my foolishness which is great, I confess, though
    somewhat exaggerated in your statement—(because if it was quite as
    bad as you say, you know, I never should have seen you ... and I
    have!) and also for yours ... because you take such a very
    preposterously wrong way for overcoming anybody's shyness. Do you
    know, I have laughed ... really laughed at your letter. No—it has not
    been so bad. I have seen you at every visit, as well as I could with
    both eyes wide open—only that by a supernatural influence they won't
    stay open with you as they are used to do with other people ... so
    now I tell you. And for the rest I promise nothing at all—as how can
    I, when it is quite beyond my control—and you have not improved my
    capabilities ... do you think you have? Why what nonsense we have come
    to—we, who ought to be 'talking Greek!' said Mr. Kenyon.


    Yes—he came and talked of you, and told me how you had been speaking
    of ... me; and I have been thinking how I should have been proud of it
    a year ago, and how I could half scold you for it now. Ah yes—and Mr.
    Kenyon told me that you had spoken exaggerations—such
    exaggerations!—Now should there not be some scolding ... some?


    But how did you expect Mr. Kenyon to 'wonder' at you, or be 'vexed'
    with you? That would have been strange surely. You are and always
    have been a chief favourite in that quarter ... appreciated, praised,
    loved, I think.


    While I write, a letter from America is put into my hands, and having
    read it through with shame and confusion of face ... not able to help
    a smile though notwithstanding, ... I send it to you to show how you
    have made me behave!—to say nothing of my other offences to the kind
    people at Boston—and to a stray gentleman in Philadelphia who is to
    perform a pilgrimage next year, he says, ... to visit the Holy Land
    and your E.B.B. I was naughty enough to take that letter to be a
    circular ... for the address of various 'Europaians.' In any case
    ... just see how I have behaved! and if it has not been worse than ...
    not opening one's eyes!—Judge. Really and gravely I am ashamed—I
    mean as to Mr. Mathews, who has been an earnest, kind friend to
    me—and I do mean to behave better. I say that to prevent your
    scolding, you know. And think of Mr. Poe, with that great Roman
    justice of his (if not rather American!), dedicating a book to one and
    abusing one in the preface of the same. He wrote a review of me in
    just that spirit—the two extremes of laudation and reprehension,
    folded in on one another. You would have thought that it had been
    written by a friend and foe, each stark mad with love and hate, and
    writing the alternate paragraphs—a most curious production indeed.


    And here I shall end. I have been waiting ... waiting for what does
    not come ... the ring ... sent to have the hair put in; but it won't
    come (now) until too late for the post, and you must hear from me
    before Monday ... you ought to have heard to-day. It has not been my
    fault—I have waited. Oh these people—who won't remember that it is
    possible to be out of patience! So I send you my letter now ... and
    what is in the paper now ... and the rest, you shall have after
    Monday. And you will not say a word ... not then ... not at all!—I
    trust you. And may God bless you.


    If ever you care less for me—I do not say it in distrust of you ... I
    trust you wholly—but you are a man, and free to care less, ... and if
    ever you do ... why in that case you will destroy, burn, ... do all
    but send back ... enough is said for you to understand.


    May God bless you. You are best to me—best ... as I see ... in the
    world—and so, dearest aright to

Your
E.B.B.


    Finished on Saturday evening. Oh—this thread of silk—And to post!!
    After all you must wait till Tuesday. I have no silk within reach and
    shall miss the post. Do forgive me.


