
Saturday Evening.


    This is the mere postscript to the letter I have just sent away. By a
    few minutes too late, comes what I have all day been waiting for, ...
    and besides (now it is just too late!) now I may have a skein of silk
    if I please, to make that knot with, ... for want of which, two locks
    meant for you, have been devoted to the infernal gods already ...
    fallen into a tangle and thrown into the fire ... and all the hair of
    my head might have followed, for I was losing my patience and temper
    fast, ... and the post to boot. So wisely I shut my letter, (after
    unwisely having driven everything to the last moment!)—and now I have
    silk to tie fast with ... to tie a 'nodus' ... 'dignus' of the
    celestial interposition—and a new packet shall be ready to go to you
    directly.


    At last I remember to tell you that the first letter you had from me
    this week, was forgotten, (not by me) forgotten, and detained, so,
    from the post—a piece of carelessness which Wilson came to confess to
    me too frankly for me to grumble as I should have done otherwise.


    For the staying longer, I did not mean to say you were wrong not to
    stay. In the first place you were keeping your father 'in a maze,' as
    you said yourself—and then, even without that, I never know what
    o'clock it is ... never. Mr. Kenyon tells me that I must live in a
    dream—which I do—time goes ... seeming to go round rather than go
    forward. The watch I have, broke its spring two years ago, and there I
    leave it in the drawer—and the clocks all round strike out of
    hearing, or at best, when the wind brings the sound, one upon another
    in a confusion. So you know more of time than I do or can.


    Till Monday then! I send the 'Ricordi' to take care of the rest ... of
    mine. It is a touching story—and there is an impracticable nobleness
    from end to end in the spirit of it. How slow (to the ear and mind)
    that Italian rhetoric is! a language for dreamers and declaimers. Yet
    Dante made it for action, and Machiavelli's prose can walk and strike
    as well as float and faint.


    The ring is smaller than I feared at first, and may perhaps—


    Now you will not say a word. My excuse is that you had nothing to
    remember me by, while I had this and this and this and this ... how
    much too much!

If I could be too much
Your            

E.B.B.


