
[Post-mark, December 3, 1845.]


    See, dearest, what the post brings me this minute! Now, is it not a
    good omen, a pleasant inconscious prophecy of what is to be? Be it
    well done, or badly—there are you, leading me up and onward, in his
    review as everywhere, at every future time! And our names will go
    together—be read together. In itself this is nothing to you, dear
    poet—but the unexpectedness, unintended significance of it has
    pleased me very much—does it not please you?—I thought I was to
    figure in that cold Quarterly all by myself, (for he writes for
    it)—but here you are close by me; it cannot but be for good. He has
    no knowledge whatever that I am even a friend of yours. Say you are
    pleased!


    There was no writing yesterday for me—nor will there be much to-day.
    In some moods, you know, I turn and take a thousand new views of what
    you say ... and find fault with you to your surprise—at others, I
    rest on you, and feel all well, all best ... now, for one
    instance, even that phrase of the possibility 'and what is to
    follow,'—even that I cannot except against—I am happy, contented;
    too well, too prodigally blessed to be even able to murmur just
    sufficiently loud to get, in addition to it all, a sweetest stopping
    of the mouth! I will say quietly and becomingly 'Yes—I do promise
    you'—yet it is some solace to—No—I will not even couple the
    promise with an adjuration that you, at the same time, see that they
    care for me properly at Hanwell Asylum ... the best by all accounts:
    yet I feel so sure of you, so safe and confident in you! If any of
    it had been my work, my own ... distrust and foreboding had pursued
    me from the beginning; but all is yours—you crust me round with
    gold and jewelry like the wood of a sceptre; and why should you
    transfer your own work? Wood enough to choose from in the first
    instance, but the choice once made!... So I rest on you, for life, for
    death, beloved—beside you do stand, in my solemn belief, the direct
    miraculous gift of God to me—that is my solemn belief; may I be
    thankful!


    I am anxious to hear from you ... when am I not?—but not before the
    American letter is written and sent. Is that done? And who was the
    visitor on Monday—and if &c. what did he remark?—And what is
    right or wrong with Saturday—is it to be mine?


    Bless you, dearest—now and for ever—words cannot say how much I am
    your own.


