
Tuesday Evening.
[Post-mark, December 4, 1845.]


    No Mr. Kenyon after all—not yesterday, not to-day; and the knock at
    the door belonged perhaps to the post, which brought me a kind letter
    from Mrs. Jameson to ask how I was, and if she might come—but she
    won't come on Saturday.... I shall 'provide'—she may as well (and
    better) come on a free day. On the other side, are you sure that Mr.
    Procter may not stretch out his hand and seize on Saturday (he was to
    dine with you, you said), or that some new engagement may not start up
    suddenly in the midst of it? I trust to you, in such a case, to alter
    our arrangement, without a second thought. Monday stands close by,
    remember, and there's a Saturday to follow Monday ... and I should
    understand at a word, or apart from a word.


    Just as you understand how to 'take me with guile,' when you tell me
    that anything in me can have any part in making you happy ... you, who
    can say such words and call them 'vain words.' Ah, well! If I only
    knew certainly, ... more certainly than the thing may be known by
    either me or you, ... that nothing in me could have any part in making
    you unhappy, ... ah, would it not be enough ... that knowledge ...
    to content me, to overjoy me? but that lies too high and out of
    reach, you see, and one can't hope to get at it except by the ladder
    Jacob saw, and which an archangel helped to hide away behind the gate
    of Heaven afterwards.


    Wednesday.—In the meantime I had a letter from you yesterday, and
    am promised another to-day. How ... I was going to say 'kind' and
    pull down the thunders ... how unkind ... will that do? ... how
    good you are to me—how dear you must be! Dear—dearest—if I feel
    that you love me, can I help it if, without any other sort of certain
    knowledge, the world grows lighter round me? being but a mortal woman,
    can I help it? no—certainly.


    I comfort myself by thinking sometimes that I can at least understand
    you, ... comprehend you in what you are and in what you possess and
    combine; and that, if doing this better than others who are better
    otherwise than I, I am, so far, worthier of the ... I mean that to
    understand you is something, and that I account it something in my own
    favour ... mine.


    Yet when you tell me that I ought to know some things, though untold,
    you are wrong, and speak what is impossible. My imagination sits by
    the roadside απεδιλος like the startled sea nymph in
    Æschylus, but never dares to put one unsandalled foot, unbidden, on a
    certain tract of ground—never takes a step there unled! and never (I
    write the simple truth) even as the alternative of the probability of
    your ceasing to care for me, have I touched (untold) on the
    possibility of your caring more for me ... never! That you should
    continue to care, was the utmost of what I saw in that direction.
    So, when you spoke of a 'strengthened feeling,' judge how I listened
    with my heart—judge!


    'Luria' is very great. You will avenge him with the sympathies of the
    world; that, I foresee.... And for the rest, it is a magnanimity which
    grows and grows, and which will, of a worldly necessity, fall by its
    own weight at last; nothing less being possible. The scene with
    Tiburzio and the end of the act with its great effects, are more
    pathetic than professed pathos. When I come to criticise, it will be
    chiefly on what I take to be a little occasional flatness in the
    versification, which you may remove if you please, by knotting up a
    few lines here and there. But I shall write more of 'Luria,'—and
    well remember in the meanwhile, that you wanted smoothness, you said.


    May God bless you. I shall have the letter to-night, I think gladly.
    Yes,—I thought of the greater safety from 'comment'—it is best in
    every way.


    I lean on you and trust to you, and am always, as to one who is all to
    me,

Your own—


