
[Post-mark, December 4, 1845.]


    Why of course I am pleased—I should have been pleased last year, for
    the vanity's sake of being reviewed in your company. Now, as far as
    that vice of vanity goes ... shall I tell you?... I would infinitely
    prefer to see you set before the public in your own right solitude,
    and supremacy, apart from me or any one else, ... this, as far as my
    vice of vanity goes, ... and because, vainer I am of my poet than of
    my poems ... pour cause. But since, according to the Quarterly
    régime, you were to be not apart but with somebody of my degree, I am
    glad, pleased, that it should be with myself:—and since I was to be
    there at all, I am pleased, very much pleased that it should be with
    you,—oh, of course I am pleased!—I am pleased that the 'names
    should be read together' as you say, ... and am happily safe from the
    apprehension of that ingenious idea of yours about 'my leading you'
    &c. ... quite happily safe from the apprehension of that idea's
    occurring to any mind in the world, except just your own. Now if I
    'find fault' with you for writing down such an extravagance, such an
    ungainly absurdity, (oh, I shall abuse it just as I shall choose!)
    can it be 'to your surprise?' can it? Ought you to say such
    things, when in the first place they are unfit in themselves and
    inapplicable, and in the second place, abominable in my eyes? The
    qualification for Hanwell Asylum is different peradventure from what
    you take it to be—we had better not examine it too nearly. You never
    will say such words again? It is your promise to me? Not those
    words—and not any in their likeness.


    Also ... nothing is my work ... if you please! What an omen you take
    in calling anything my work! If it is my work, woe on it—for
    everything turns to evil which I touch. Let it be God's work and
    yours, and I may take breath and wait in hope—and indeed I exclaim to
    myself about the miracle of it far more even than you can do. It seems
    to me (as I say over and over ... I say it to my own thoughts
    oftenest) it seems to me still a dream how you came here at all, ...
    the very machinery of it seems miraculous. Why did I receive you and
    only you? Can I tell? no, not a word.


    Last year I had such an escape of seeing Mr. Horne; and in this way it
    was. He was going to Germany, he said, for an indefinite time, and
    took the trouble of begging me to receive him for ten minutes before
    he went. I answered with my usual 'no,' like a wild Indian—whereupon
    he wrote me a letter so expressive of mortification and vexation ...
    'mortification' was one of the words used, I remember, ... that I grew
    ashamed of myself and told him to come any day (of the last five or
    six days he had to spare) between two and five. Well!—he never came.
    Either he was overcome with work and engagements of various sorts and
    had not a moment, (which was his way of explaining the matter and
    quite true I dare say) or he was vexed and resolved on punishing me
    for my caprices. If the latter was the motive, I cannot call the
    punishment effective, ... for I clapped my hands for joy when I felt
    my danger to be passed—and now of course, I have no scruples.... I
    may be as capricious as I please, ... may I not? Not that I ask you.
    It is a settled matter. And it is useful to keep out Mr. Chorley with
    Mr. Horne, and Mr. Horne with Mr. Chorley, and the rest of the world
    with those two. Only the miracle is that you should be behind the
    enclosure—within it ... and so!—


    That is my side of the wonder! of the machinery of the wonder, ...
    as I see it!—But there are greater things than these.


    Speaking of the portrait of you in the 'Spirit of the Age' ... which
    is not like ... no!—which has not your character, in a line of it ...
    something in just the forehead and eyes and hair, ... but even that,
    thrown utterly out of your order, by another bearing so unlike you...!
    speaking of that portrait ... shall I tell you?—Mr. Horne had the
    goodness to send me all those portraits, and I selected the heads
    which, in right hero-worship, were anything to me, and had them framed
    after a rough fashion and hung up before my eyes; Harriet Martineau's
    ... because she was a woman and admirable, and had written me some
    kind letters—and for the rest, Wordsworth's, Carlyle's, Tennyson's
    and yours. The day you paid your first visit here, I, in a fit of
    shyness not quite unnatural, ... though I have been cordially laughed
    at for it by everybody in the house ... pulled down your portrait, ...
    (there is the nail, under Wordsworth—) and then pulled down
    Tennyson's in a fit of justice,—because I would not have his hung up
    and yours away. It was the delight of my brothers to open all the
    drawers and the boxes, and whatever they could get access to, and find
    and take those two heads and hang them on the old nails and analyse my
    'absurdity' to me, day after day; but at last I tired them out, being
    obstinate; and finally settled the question one morning by fastening
    the print of you inside your Paracelsus. Oh no, it is not like—and I
    knew it was not, before I saw you, though Mr. Kenyon said, 'Rather
    like!'


    By the way Mr. Kenyon does not come. It is strange that he should not
    come: when he told me that he could not see me 'for a week or a
    fortnight,' he meant it, I suppose.


    So it is to be on Saturday? And I will write directly to America—the
    letter will be sent by the time you get this. May God bless you ever.


    It is not so much a look of 'ferocity,' ... as you say, ... in that
    head, as of expression by intention. Several people have said of it
    what nobody would say of you ... 'How affected-looking.' Which is too
    strong—but it is not like you, in any way, and there's the truth.


    So until Saturday. I read 'Luria' and feel the life in him. But walk
    and do not work! do you?

Wholly your
E.B.B.

