
Sunday Night.
[Post-mark, December 8, 1845.]


    Well, I did see your brother last night ... and very wisely neither
    spoke nor kept silence in the proper degree, but said that 'I hoped
    you were well'—from the sudden feeling that I must say something of
    you—not pretend indifference about you now ... and from the
    impossibility of saying the full of what I might; because other
    people were by—and after, in the evening, when I should have remedied
    the first imperfect expression, I had not altogether the heart. So,
    you, dearest, will clear me with him if he wonders, will you not? But
    it all hangs together; speaking of you,—to you,—writing to you—all
    is helpless and sorrowful work by the side of what is in my soul to
    say and to write—or is it not the natural consequence? If these
    vehicles of feelings sufficed—there would be the end!—And that my
    feeling for you should end!... For the rest, the headache which kept
    away while I sate with you, made itself amends afterward, and as it is
    unkind to that warm Talfourd to look blank at his hospitable
    endeavours, all my power of face went à qui de droit—


    Did your brother tell you ... yes, I think ... of the portentous book,
    lettered II, and thick as a law-book, of congratulatory letters on
    the appearance of 'Ion'?—But how under the B's in the Index came
    'Miss Barrett' and, woe's me, 'R.B.'! I don't know when I have had so
    ghastly a visitation. There was the utterly forgotten letter, in the
    as thoroughly disused hand-writing, in the ... I fear ... still as
    completely obsolete feeling—no, not so bad as that—but at first
    there was all the novelty, and social admiration at the friend—it is
    truly not right to pluck all the rich soil from the roots and hold
    them up clean and dry as if they came so from all you now see, which
    is nothing at all ... like the Chinese Air-plant! Do you understand
    this? And surely 'Ion' is a very, very beautiful and noble
    conception, and finely executed,—a beautiful work—what has come
    after, has lowered it down by grade after grade ... it don't stand
    apart on the hill, like a wonder, now it is built up to by other
    attempts; but the great difference is in myself. Another maker of
    another 'Ion,' finding me out and behaving as Talfourd did, would not
    find that me, so to be behaved to, so to be honoured—though he
    should have all the good will! Ten years ago!


    And ten years hence!


    Always understand that you do not take me as I was at the beginning
    ... with a crowd of loves to give to something and so get rid of
    their pain and burden. I have known what that ends in—a handful of
    anything may be as sufficient a sample, serve your purposes and teach
    you its nature, as well as whole heaps—and I know what most of the
    pleasures of this world are—so that I can be surer of myself, and
    make you surer, on calm demonstrated grounds, than if I had a host of
    objects of admiration or ambition yet to become acquainted with. You
    say, 'I am a man and may change'—I answer, yes—but, while I hold my
    senses, only change for the presumable better ... not for the
    experienced worst.


    Here is my Uncle's foot on the stair ... his knock hurried the last
    sentence—here he is by me!—Understand what this would have led to,
    how you would have been proved logically my own, best, extreme want,
    my life's end—yes; dearest! Bless you ever—

R.B.


