
Sunday.
[Post-mark, December 8, 1845.]


    Let me hear how you are, and that you are better instead of worse for
    the exertions of last night. After you left me yesterday I considered
    how we might have managed it more conveniently for you, and had the
    lamp in, and arranged matters so as to interpose less time between the
    going and the dining, even if you and George did not go together,
    which might have been best, but which I did not like quite to propose.
    Now, supposing that on Thursday you dine in town, remember not to be
    unnecessarily 'perplext in the extreme' where to spend the time before
    ... five, ... shall I say, at any rate? We will have the lamp, and I
    can easily explain if an observation should be made ... only it will
    not be, because our goers-out here never come home until six, and the
    head of the house, not until seven ... as I told you. George thought
    it worth while going to Mr. Talfourd's yesterday, just to see the
    author of 'Paracelsus' dance the Polka ... should I not tell you?


    I am vexed by another thing which he tells me—vexed, if amused a
    little by the absurdity of it. I mean that absurd affair of the
    'Autography'—now isn't it absurd? And for neither you nor George to
    have the chivalry of tearing out that letter of mine, which was absurd
    too in its way, and which, knowing less of the world than I know now,
    I wrote as if writing for my private conscience, and privately
    repented writing in a day, and have gone on repenting ever since when
    I happened to think enough of it for repentance! Because if Mr.
    Serjeant Talfourd sent then his 'Ion' to me, he did it in mere
    good-nature, hearing by chance of me through the publisher of my
    'Prometheus' at the moment, and of course caring no more for my
    'opinion' than for the rest of me—and it was excessively bad taste in
    me to say more than the briefest word of thanks in return, even if I
    had been competent to say it. Ah well!—you see how it is, and that I
    am vexed you should have read it, ... as George says you did ... he
    laughing to see me so vexed. So I turn round and avenge myself by
    crying aloud against the editor of the 'Autography'! Surely such a
    thing was never done before ... even by an author in the last stage of
    a mortal disease of self-love. To edit the common parlance of
    conventional flatteries, ... lettered in so many volumes, bound in
    green morocco, and laid on the drawing-room table for one's own
    particular private public,—is it not a miracle of vanity ... neither
    more nor less?


    I took the opportunity of the letter to Mr. Mathews (talking of vanity
    ... mine!) to send Landor's verses to America ... yours—so they
    will be in the American papers.... I know Mr. Mathews. I was speaking
    to him of your last number of 'Bells and Pomegranates,' and the verses
    came in naturally; just as my speaking did, for it is not the first
    time nor the second nor the third even that I have written to him of
    you, though I admire how in all those previous times I did it in pure
    disinterestedness, ... purely because your name belonged to my country
    and to her literature, ... and how I have a sort of reward at this
    present, in being able to write what I please without anyone's saying
    'it is a new fancy.' As for the Americans, they have 'a zeal without
    knowledge' for poetry. There is more love for verse among them than
    among the English. But they suffer themselves to be led in their
    choice of poets by English critics of average discernment; this is
    said of them by their own men of letters. Tennyson is idolized deep
    down in the bush woods (to their honour be it said), but to
    understand you sufficiently, they wait for the explanations of the
    critics. So I wanted them to see what Landor says of you. The comfort
    in these questions is, that there can be no question, except between
    the sooner and the later—a little sooner, and a little later: but
    when there is real love and zeal it becomes worth while to try to
    ripen the knowledge. They love Tennyson so much that the colour of his
    waistcoats is a sort of minor Oregon question ... and I like that—do
    not you?


    Monday.—Now I have your letter: and you will observe, without a
    finger post from me, how busily we have both been preoccupied in
    disavowing our own letters of old on 'Ion'—Mr. Talfourd's collection
    goes to prove too much, I think—and you, a little too much, when you
    draw inferences of no-changes, from changes like these. Oh yes—I
    perfectly understand that every sort of inconstancy of purpose regards
    a 'presumably better' thing—but I do not so well understand how any
    presumable doubt is to be set to rest by that fact, ... I do not
    indeed. Have you seen all the birds and beasts in the world? have you
    seen the 'unicorns'?—Which is only a pebble thrown down into your
    smooth logic; and we need not stand by to watch the bubbles born of
    it. And as to the 'Ion' letters, I am delighted that you have anything
    to repent, as I have everything. Certainly it is a noble play—there
    is the moral sublime in it: but it is not the work of a poet, ... and
    if he had never written another to show what was not in him, this
    might have been 'predicated' of it as surely, I hold. Still, it is a
    noble work—and even if you over-praised it, (I did not read your
    letter, though you read mine, alas!) you, under the circumstances,
    would have been less noble yourself not to have done so—only, how I
    agree with you in what you say against the hanging up of these dry
    roots, the soil shaken off! Such abominable taste—now isn't it? ...
    though you do not use that word.


    I thought Mr. Kenyon would have come yesterday and that I might have
    something to tell you, of him at least.


    And George never told me of the thing you found to say to him of me,
    and which makes me smile, and would have made him wonder if he had not
    been suffering probably from some legal distraction at the moment,
    inasmuch as he knew perfectly that you had just left me. My sisters
    told him down-stairs and he came into this room just before he set off
    on Saturday, with a, ... 'So I am to meet Mr. Browning?' But he made
    no observation afterwards—none: and if he heard what you said at all
    (which I doubt), he referred it probably to some enforced civility on
    'Yorick's' part when the 'last chapter' was too much with him.


    I have written about 'Luria' in another place—you shall have the
    papers when I have read through the play. How different this living
    poetry is from the polished rhetoric of 'Ion.' The man and the statue
    are not more different. After all poetry is a distinct thing—it is
    here or it is not here ... it is not a matter of 'taste,' but of
    sight and feeling.


    As to the 'Venice' it gives proof (does it not?) rather of poetical
    sensibility than of poetical faculty? or did you expect me to say
    more?—of the perception of the poet, rather than of his conception.
    Do you think more than this? There are fine, eloquent expressions, and
    the tone of sentiment is good and high everywhere.


    Do not write 'Luria' if your head is uneasy—and you cannot say that
    it is not ... can you? Or will you if you can? In any case you will do
    what you can ... take care of yourself and not suffer yourself to be
    tired either by writing or by too much going out, and take the
    necessary exercise ... this, you will do—I entreat you to do it.


    May God bless and make you happy, as ... you will lose nothing if I
    say ... as I am yours—


