
Tuesday Morning.
[Post-mark, December 9, 1845.]


    Well, then, I am no longer sorry that I did not read either of
    your letters ... for there were two in the collection. I did not read
    one word of them—and hear why. When your brother and I took the book
    between us in wonderment at the notion—we turned to the index, in
    large text-hand, and stopped at 'Miss B.'—and he indeed read them,
    or some of them, but holding the volume at a distance which defied my
    short-sighted eye—all I saw was the faint small characters—and,
    do you know ... I neither trusted myself to ask a nearer look ... nor
    a second look ... as if I were studying unduly what I had just said
    was most unfairly exposed to view!—so I was silent, and lost you (in
    that)—then, and for ever, I promise you, now that you speak of
    vexation it would give you. All I know of the notes, that one is
    addressed to Talfourd in the third person—and when I had run through
    my own ... not far off ... (BA-BR)—I was sick of the book altogether.
    You are generous to me—but, to say the truth, I might have remembered
    the most justifying circumstance in my case ... which was, that my own
    'Paracelsus,' printed a few months before, had been as dead a failure
    as 'Ion' a brilliant success—for, until just before.... Ah, really I
    forget!—but I know that until Forster's notice in the Examiner
    appeared, every journal that thought worth while to allude to the
    poem at all, treated it with entire contempt ... beginning, I think,
    with the Athenæum which then made haste to say, a few days after
    its publication, 'that it was not without talent but spoiled by
    obscurity and only an imitation of—Shelley'!—something to this
    effect, in a criticism of about three lines among their 'Library
    Table' notices. And that first taste was a most flattering sample of
    what the 'craft' had in store for me—since my publisher and I had
    fairly to laugh at his 'Book'—(quite of another kind than the
    Serjeant's)—in which he was used to paste extracts from newspapers
    and the like—seeing that, out of a long string of notices, one vied
    with its predecessor in disgust at my 'rubbish,' as their word went:
    but Forster's notice altered a good deal—which I have to recollect
    for his good. Still, the contrast between myself and Talfourd was so
    utter—you remember the world's-wonder 'Ion' made,—that I was
    determined not to pass for the curious piece of neglected merit I
    really was not—and so!—


    But, dearest, why should you leave your own especial sphere of doing
    me good for another than yours?


    Does the sun rake and hoe about the garden as well as thine steadily
    over it? Why must you, who give me heart and power, as nothing else
    did or could, to do well—concern yourself with what might be done by
    any good, kind ministrant only fit for such offices? Not that I
    feel, even, more bound to you for them—they have their weight, I
    know ... but what weight beside the divine gift of yourself? Do
    not, dear, dearest, care for making me known: you know me!—and
    they know so little, after all your endeavour, who are ignorant of
    what you are to me—if you ... well, but that will follow; if I do
    greater things one day—what shall they serve for, what range
    themselves under of right?—


    Mr. Mathews sent me two copies of his poems—and, I believe, a
    newspaper, 'when time was,' about the 'Blot in the Scutcheon'—and
    also, through Moxon—(I believe it was Mr. M.)—a proposition for
    reprinting—to which I assented of course—and there was an end to the
    matter.


    And might I have stayed till five?—dearest, I will never ask for
    more than you give—but I feel every single sand of the gold showers
    ... spite of what I say above! I have an invitation for Thursday
    which I had no intention of remembering (it admitted of such
    liberty)—but now....


    Something I will say! 'Polka,' forsooth!—one lady whose head
    could not, and another whose feet could not, dance!—But I talked a
    little to your brother whom I like more and more: it comforts me that
    he is yours.


    So, Thursday,—thank you from the heart! I am well, and about to go
    out. This week I have done nothing to 'Luria'—is it that my ring is
    gone? There surely is something to forgive in me—for that shameful
    business—or I should not feel as I do in the matter: but you did
    forgive me.

God bless my own, only love—ever—
Yours wholly
R.B.


    N.B. An antiquarian friend of mine in old days picked up a nondescript
    wonder of a coin. I just remember he described it as Rhomboid in
    shape—cut, I fancy, out of church-plate in troubled times. What did
    my friend do but get ready a box, lined with velvet, and properly
    compartmented, to have always about him, so that the next such coin
    he picked up, say in Cheapside, he might at once transfer to a place
    of safety ... his waistcoat pocket being no happy receptacle for the
    same. I saw the box—and encouraged the man to keep a vigilant eye.


    Parallel. R.B. having found an unicorn....


    Do you forgive these strips of paper? I could not wait to send for
    more—having exhausted my stock.


