
Tuesday Evening
[Post-mark, December 10, 1845.]


    It was right of you to write ... (now see what jangling comes of not
    using the fit words.... I said 'right,' not to say 'kind') ... right
    of you to write to me to-day—and I had begun to be disappointed
    already because the post seemed to be past, when suddenly the knock
    brought the letter which deserves all this praising. If not 'kind' ...
    then kindest ... will that do better? Perhaps.


    Mr. Kenyon was here to-day and asked when you were coming again—and
    I, I answered at random ... 'at the end of the week—Thursday or
    Friday'—which did not prevent another question about 'what we were
    consulting about.' He said that he 'must have you,' and had written to
    beg you to go to his door on days when you came here; only murmuring
    something besides of neither Thursday nor Friday being disengaged days
    with him. Oh, my disingenuousness!—Then he talked again of 'Saul.' A
    true impression the poem has made on him! He reads it every night, he
    says, when he comes home and just before he goes to sleep, to put his
    dreams into order, and observed very aptly, I thought, that it
    reminded him of Homer's shield of Achilles, thrown into lyrical whirl
    and life. Quite ill he took it of me the 'not expecting him to like it
    so much' and retorted on me with most undeserved severity (as I felt
    it), that I 'never understood anybody to have any sensibility except
    myself.' Wasn't it severe, to come from dear Mr. Kenyon? But he has
    caught some sort of evil spirit from your 'Saul' perhaps; though
    admiring the poem enough to have a good spirit instead. And do you
    remember of the said poem, that it is there only as a first part, and
    that the next parts must certainly follow and complete what will be a
    great lyrical work—now remember. And forget 'Luria' ... if you are
    better forgetting. And forget me ... when you are happier
    forgetting. I say that too.


    So your idea of an unicorn is—one horn broken off. And you a
    poet!—one horn broken off—or hid in the blackthorn hedge!—


    Such a mistake, as our enlightened public, on their part, made, when
    they magnified the divinity of the brazen chariot, just under the
    thunder-cloud! I don't remember the Athenæum, but can well believe
    that it said what you say. The Athenæum admires only what gods, men
    and columns reject. It applauds nothing but mediocrity—mark it, as a
    general rule! The good, they see—the great escapes them. Dare to
    breathe a breath above the close, flat conventions of literature, and
    you are 'put down' and instructed how to be like other people. By the
    way, see by the very last number, that you never think to write
    'peoples,' on pain of writing what is obsolete—and these the teachers
    of the public! If the public does not learn, where is the marvel of
    it? An imitation of Shelley!—when if 'Paracelsus' was anything it was
    the expression of a new mind, as all might see—as I saw, let me be
    proud to remember, and I was not overdazzled by 'Ion.'


    Ah, indeed if I could 'rake and hoe' ... or even pick up weeds along
    the walk, ... which is the work of the most helpless children, ... if
    I could do any of this, there would be some good of me: but as for
    'shining' ... shining ... when there is not so much light in me as to
    do 'carpet work' by, why let anyone in the world, except you, tell
    me to shine, and it will just be a mockery! But you have studied
    astronomy with your favourite snails, who are apt to take a
    dark-lanthorn for the sun, and so.—


    And so, you come on Thursday, and I only hope that Mrs. Jameson will
    not come too, (the carpet work makes me think of her; and, not having
    come yet, she may come on Thursday by a fatal cross-stitch!) for I do
    not hear from her, and my precautions are 'watched out,' May God bless
    you always.

Your own—


    But no—I did not forgive. Where was the fault to be forgiven, except
    in me, for not being right in my meaning?


