
Friday.
[Post-mark, December 13, 1845.]


    Do not blame me in your thoughts for what I said yesterday or wrote a
    day before, or think perhaps on the dark side of some other days when
    I cannot help it ... always when I cannot help it—you could not
    blame me if you saw the full motives as I feel them. If it is
    distrust, it is not of you, dearest of all!—but of myself
    rather:—it is not doubt of you, but for you. From the beginning I
    have been subject to the too reasonable fear which rises as my spirits
    fall, that your happiness might suffer in the end through your having
    known me:—it is for you I fear, whenever I fear:—and if you were
    less to me, ... should I fear do you think?—if you were to me only
    what I am to myself for instance, ... if your happiness were only as
    precious as my own in my own eyes, ... should I fear, do you think,
    then? Think, and do not blame me.


    To tell you to 'forget me when forgetting seemed happiest for you,'
    ... (was it not that, I said?) proved more affection than might go
    in smoother words.... I could prove the truth of that out of my
    heart.


    And for the rest, you need not fear any fear of mine—my fear will not
    cross a wish of yours, be sure! Neither does it prevent your being all
    to me ... all: more than I used to take for all when I looked round
    the world, ... almost more than I took for all in my earliest dreams.
    You stand in between me and not merely the living who stood closest,
    but between me and the closer graves, ... and I reproach myself for
    this sometimes, and, so, ask you not to blame me for a different
    thing.


    As to unfavourable influences, ... I can speak of them quietly, having
    foreseen them from the first, ... and it is true, I have been thinking
    since yesterday, that I might be prevented from receiving you here,
    and should, if all were known: but with that act, the adverse power
    would end. It is not my fault if I have to choose between two
    affections; only my pain; and I have not to choose between two duties,
    I feel, ... since I am yours, while I am of any worth to you at all.
    For the plan of the sealed letter, it would correct no evil,—ah, you
    do not see, you do not understand. The danger does not come from the
    side to which a reason may go. Only one person holds the thunder—and
    I shall be thundered at; I shall not be reasoned with—it is
    impossible. I could tell you some dreary chronicles made for laughing
    and crying over; and you know that if I once thought I might be loved
    enough to be spared above others, I cannot think so now. In the
    meanwhile we need not for the present be afraid. Let there be ever so
    many suspectors, there will be no informers. I suspect the suspectors,
    but the informers are out of the world, I am very sure:—and then, the
    one person, by a curious anomaly, never draws an inference of this
    order, until the bare blade of it is thrust palpably into his hand,
    point outwards. So it has been in other cases than ours—and so it is,
    at this moment in the house, with others than ourselves.


    I have your letter to stop me. If I had my whole life in my hands with
    your letter, could I thank you for it, I wonder, at all worthily? I
    cannot believe that I could. Yet in life and in death I shall be
    grateful to you.—


    But for the paper—no. Now, observe, that it would seem like a
    prepared apology for something wrong. And besides—the apology would
    be nothing but the offence in another form—unless you said it was all
    a mistake—(will you, again?)—that it was all a mistake and you
    were only calling for your boots! Well, if you said that, it would
    be worth writing, but anything less would be something worse than
    nothing: and would not save me—which you were thinking of, I
    know—would not save me the least of the stripes. For
    'conditions'—now I will tell you what I said once in a jest....


    'If a prince of Eldorado should come, with a pedigree of lineal
    descent from some signory in the moon in one hand, and a ticket of
    good-behaviour from the nearest Independent chapel, in the other'—?


    'Why even then,' said my sister Arabel, 'it would not do.' And she
    was right, and we all agreed that she was right. It is an obliquity of
    the will—and one laughs at it till the turn comes for crying. Poor
    Henrietta has suffered silently, with that softest of possible
    natures, which hers is indeed; beginning with implicit obedience, and
    ending with something as unlike it as possible: but, you see, where
    money is wanted, and where the dependence is total—see! And when
    once, in the case of the one dearest to me; when just at the last he
    was involved in the same grief, and I attempted to make over my
    advantages to him; (it could be no sacrifice, you know—I did not
    want the money, and could buy nothing with it so good as his
    happiness,—) why then, my hands were seized and tied—and then and
    there, in the midst of the trouble, came the end of all! I tell you
    all this, just to make you understand a little. Did I not tell you
    before? But there is no danger at present—and why ruffle this present
    with disquieting thoughts? Why not leave that future to itself? For
    me, I sit in the track of the avalanche quite calmly ... so calmly as
    to surprise myself at intervals—and yet I know the reason of the
    calmness well.


    For Mr. Kenyon—dear Mr. Kenyon—he will speak the softest of words,
    if any—only he will think privately that you are foolish and that I
    am ungenerous, but I will not say so any more now, so as to teaze you.


    There is another thing, of more consequence than his thoughts, which
    is often in my mind to ask you of—but there will be time for such
    questions—let us leave the winter to its own peace. If I should be
    ill again you will be reasonable and we both must submit to God's
    necessity. Not, you know, that I have the least intention of being
    ill, if I can help it—and in the case of a tolerably mild winter, and
    with all this strength to use, there are probabilities for me—and
    then I have sunshine from you, which is better than Pisa's.


    And what more would you say? Do I not hear and understand! It seems to
    me that I do both, or why all this wonder and gratitude? If the
    devotion of the remainder of my life could prove that I hear, ...
    would it be proof enough? Proof enough perhaps—but not gift enough.


    May God bless you always.


    I have put some of the hair into a little locket which was given to
    me when I was a child by my favourite uncle, Papa's only brother, who
    used to tell me that he loved me better than my own father did, and
    was jealous when I was not glad. It is through him in part, that I am
    richer than my sisters—through him and his mother—and a great grief
    it was and trial, when he died a few years ago in Jamaica, proving by
    his last act that I was unforgotten. And now I remember how he once
    said to me: 'Do you beware of ever loving!—If you do, you will not do
    it half: it will be for life and death.'


    So I put the hair into his locket, which I wear habitually, and which
    never had hair before—the natural use of it being for perfume:—and
    this is the best perfume for all hours, besides the completing of a
    prophecy.

Your
E.B.B.


