
Monday.
[Post-mark, December 16, 1845.]


    Mr. Kenyon has not come—he does not come so often, I think. Did he
    know from you that you were to see me last Thursday? If he did it
    might be as well, do you not think? to go to him next week. Will it
    not seem frequent, otherwise? But if you did not tell him of
    Thursday distinctly (I did not—remember!), he might take the
    Wednesday's visit to be the substitute for rather than the successor
    of Thursday's: and in that case, why not write a word to him yourself
    to propose dining with him as he suggested? He really wishes to see
    you—of that, I am sure. But you will know what is best to do, and he
    may come here to-morrow perhaps, and ask a whole set of questions
    about you; so my right hand may forget its cunning for any good it
    does. Only don't send messages by me, please!


    How happy I am with your letter to-night.


    When I had sent away my last letter I began to remember, and could not
    help smiling to do so, that I had totally forgotten the great subject
    of my 'fame,' and the oath you administered about it—totally! Now how
    do you read that omen? If I forget myself, who is to remember me, do
    you think?—except you?—which brings me where I would stay.
    Yes—'yours' it must be, but you, it had better be! But, to leave
    the vain superstitions, let me go on to assure you that I did mean to
    answer that part of your former letter, and do mean to behave well and
    be obedient. Your wish would be enough, even if there could be
    likelihood without it of my doing nothing ever again. Oh, certainly I
    have been idle—it comes of lotus-eating—and, besides, of sitting too
    long in the sun. Yet 'idle' may not be the word! silent I have been,
    through too many thoughts to speak just that!—As to writing letters
    and reading manuscripts' filling all my time, why I must lack 'vital
    energy' indeed—you do not mean seriously to fancy such a thing of me!
    For the rest.... Tell me—Is it your opinion that when the apostle
    Paul saw the unspeakable things, being snatched up into the third
    Heavens 'whether in the body or out of the body he could not
    tell,'—is it your opinion that, all the week after, he worked
    particularly hard at the tent-making? For my part, I doubt it.


    I would not speak profanely or extravagantly—it is not the best way
    to thank God. But to say only that I was in the desert and that I am
    among the palm-trees, is to say nothing ... because it is easy to
    understand how, after walking straight on ... on ... furlong after
    furlong ... dreary day after dreary day, ... one may come to the end
    of the sand and within sight of the fountain:—there is nothing
    miraculous in that, you know!


    Yet even in that case, to doubt whether it may not all be mirage,
    would be the natural first thought, the recurring dream-fear! now
    would it not? And you can reproach me for my thoughts, as if they
    were unnatural!


    Never mind about the third act—the advantage is that you will not
    tire yourself perhaps the next week. What gladness it is that you
    should really seem better, and how much better that is than even
    'Luria.'


    Mrs. Jameson came to-day—but I will tell you.


    May God bless you now and always.

Your
E.B.B.


