
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, December 19, 1845.]


    I ought to have written yesterday: so to-day when I need a letter and
    get none, there is my own fault besides, and the less consolation. A
    letter from you would light up this sad day. Shall I fancy how, if a
    letter lay there where I look, rain might fall and winds blow while
    I listened to you, long after the words had been laid to heart? But
    here you are in your place—with me who am your own—your own—and so
    the rhyme joins on,

She shall speak to me in places lone
With a low and holy tone—
Ay: when I have lit my lamp at night
She shall be present with my sprite:
And I will say, whate'er it be,
Every word she telleth me!

Now, is that taken from your book? No—but from my book, which holds
    my verses as I write them; and as I open it, I read that.


    And speaking of verse—somebody gave me a few days ago that Mr.
    Lowell's book you once mentioned to me. Anyone who 'admires' you
    shall have my sympathy at once—even though he do change the
    laughing wine-mark into a 'stain' in that perfectly beautiful
    triplet—nor am I to be indifferent to his good word for myself
    (though not very happily connected with the criticism on the epithet
    in that 'Yorkshire Tragedy'—which has better things, by the
    way—seeing that 'white boy,' in old language, meant just 'good boy,'
    a general epithet, as Johnson notices in the life of Dryden, whom the
    schoolmaster Busby was used to class with his 'white boys'—this is
    hypercriticism, however). But these American books should not be
    reprinted here—one asks, what and where is the class to which they
    address themselves? for, no doubt, we have our congregations of
    ignoramuses that enjoy the profoundest ignorance imaginable on the
    subjects treated of; but these are evidently not the audience Mr.
    Lowell reckons on; rather, if one may trust the manner of his setting
    to work, he would propound his doctrine to the class. Always to be
    found, of spirits instructed up to a certain height and there
    resting—vines that run up a prop and there tangle and grow to a
    knot—which want supplying with fresh poles; so the provident man
    brings his bundle into the grounds, and sticks them in laterally or
    a-top of the others, as the case requires, and all the old stocks go
    on growing again—but here, with us, whoever wanted Chaucer, or
    Chapman, or Ford, got him long ago—what else have Lamb, and
    Coleridge, and Hazlitt and Hunt and so on to the end of their
    generations ... what else been doing this many a year? What one
    passage of all these, cited with the very air of a Columbus, but has
    been known to all who know anything of poetry this many, many a year?
    The others, who don't know anything, are the stocks that have got to
    shoot, not climb higher—compost, they want in the first place!
    Ford's and Crashaw's rival Nightingales—why they have been
    dissertated on by Wordsworth and Coleridge, then by Lamb and Hazlitt,
    then worked to death by Hunt, who printed them entire and quoted them
    to pieces again, in every periodical he was ever engaged upon; and yet
    after all, here 'Philip'—'must read' (out of a roll of dropping
    papers with yellow ink tracings, so old!) something at which 'John'
    claps his hands and says 'Really—that these ancients should own so
    much wit &c.'! The passage no longer looks its fresh self after this
    veritable passage from hand to hand: as when, in old dances, the belle
    began the figure with her own partner, and by him was transferred to
    the next, and so to the next—they ever beginning with all the old
    alacrity and spirit; but she bearing a still-accumulating weight of
    tokens of gallantry, and none the better for every fresh pushing and
    shoving and pulling and hauling—till, at the bottom of the room—


    To which Mr. Lowell might say, that—No, I will say the true thing
    against myself—and it is, that when I turn from what is in my mind,
    and determine to write about anybody's book to avoid writing that I
    love and love and love again my own, dearest love—because of the
    cuckoo-song of it,—then, I shall be in no better humour with that
    book than with Mr. Lowell's!


    But I have a new thing to say or sing—you never before heard me
    love and bless and send my heart after—'Ba'—did you? Ba ... and
    that is you! I tried ... (more than wanted) to call you that, on
    Wednesday! I have a flower here—rather, a tree, a mimosa, which must
    be turned and turned, the side to the light changing in a little time
    to the leafy side, where all the fans lean and spread ... so I turn
    your name to me, that side I have not last seen: you cannot tell how I
    feel glad that you will not part with the name—Barrett—seeing you
    have two of the same—and must always, moreover, remain my EBB!


    Dearest 'E.B.C.'—no, no! and so it will never be!


    Have you seen Mr. Kenyon? I did not write ... knowing that such a
    procedure would draw the kind sure letter in return, with the
    invitation &c., as if I had asked for it! I had perhaps better call on
    him some morning very early.


    Bless you, my own sweetest. You will write to me, I know in my heart!

Ever may God bless you!
R.B.

