
Thursday Evening.
[Post-mark, December 20, 1845.]


    Dearest, you know how to say what makes me happiest, you who never
    think, you say, of making me happy! For my part I do not think of it
    either; I simply understand that you are my happiness, and that
    therefore you could not make another happiness for me, such as would
    be worth having—not even you! Why, how could you? That was in my
    mind to speak yesterday, but I could not speak it—to write it, is
    easier.


    Talking of happiness—shall I tell you? Promise not to be angry and I
    will tell you. I have thought sometimes that, if I considered myself
    wholly, I should choose to die this winter—now—before I had
    disappointed you in anything. But because you are better and dearer
    and more to be considered than I, I do not choose it. I cannot
    choose to give you any pain, even on the chance of its being a less
    pain, a less evil, than what may follow perhaps (who can say?), if I
    should prove the burden of your life.


    For if you make me happy with some words, you frighten me with
    others—as with the extravagance yesterday—and seriously—too
    seriously, when the moment for smiling at them is past—I am
    frightened, I tremble! When you come to know me as well as I know
    myself, what can save me, do you think, from disappointing and
    displeasing you? I ask the question, and find no answer.


    It is a poor answer, to say that I can do one thing well ... that I
    have one capacity largely. On points of the general affections, I have
    in thought applied to myself the words of Mme. de Stael, not
    fretfully, I hope, not complainingly, I am sure (I can thank God for
    most affectionate friends!) not complainingly, yet mournfully and in
    profound conviction—those words—'jamais je n'ai pas été aimée comme
    j'aime.' The capacity of loving is the largest of my powers I
    think—I thought so before knowing you—and one form of feeling. And
    although any woman might love you—every woman,—with understanding
    enough to discern you by—(oh, do not fancy that I am unduly
    magnifying mine office) yet I persist in persuading myself that!
    Because I have the capacity, as I said—and besides I owe more to you
    than others could, it seems to me: let me boast of it. To many, you
    might be better than all things while one of all things: to me you are
    instead of all—to many, a crowning happiness—to me, the happiness
    itself. From out of the deep dark pits men see the stars more
    gloriously—and de profundis amavi—


    It is a very poor answer! Almost as poor an answer as yours could be
    if I were to ask you to teach me to please you always; or rather, how
    not to displease you, disappoint you, vex you—what if all those
    things were in my fate?


    And—(to begin!)—I am disappointed to-night. I expected a letter
    which does not come—and I had felt so sure of having a letter
    to-night ... unreasonably sure perhaps, which means doubly sure.


    Friday.—Remember you have had two notes of mine, and that it is
    certainly not my turn to write, though I am writing.


    Scarcely you had gone on Wednesday when Mr. Kenyon came. It seemed
    best to me, you know, that you should go—I had the presentiment of
    his footsteps—and so near they were, that if you had looked up the
    street in leaving the door, you must have seen him! Of course I told
    him of your having been here and also at his house; whereupon he
    enquired eagerly if you meant to dine with him, seeming disappointed
    by my negative. 'Now I had told him,' he said ... and murmured on to
    himself loud enough for me to hear, that 'it would have been a
    peculiar pleasure &c.' The reason I have not seen him lately is the
    eternal 'business,' just as you thought, and he means to come 'oftener
    now,' so nothing is wrong as I half thought.


    As your letter does not come it is a good opportunity for asking what
    sort of ill humour, or (to be more correct) bad temper, you most
    particularly admire—sulkiness?—the divine gift of sitting aloof in a
    cloud like any god for three weeks together perhaps—pettishness? ...
    which will get you up a storm about a crooked pin or a straight one
    either? obstinacy?—which is an agreeable form of temper I can assure
    you, and describes itself—or the good open passion which lies on the
    floor and kicks, like one of my cousins?—Certainly I prefer the last,
    and should, I think, prefer it (as an evil), even if it were not the
    born weakness of my own nature—though I humbly confess (to you, who
    seem to think differently of these things) that never since I was a
    child have I upset all the chairs and tables and thrown the books
    about the room in a fury—I am afraid I do not even 'kick,' like my
    cousin, now. Those demonstrations were all done by the 'light of other
    days'—not a very full light, I used to be accustomed to think:—but
    you,—you think otherwise, you take a fury to be the opposite of
    'indifference,' as if there could be no such thing as self-control!
    Now for my part, I do believe that the worst-tempered persons in the
    world are less so through sensibility than selfishness—they spare
    nobody's heart, on the ground of being themselves pricked by a straw.
    Now see if it isn't so. What, after all, is a good temper but
    generosity in trifles—and what, without it, is the happiness of life?
    We have only to look round us. I saw a woman, once, burst into
    tears, because her husband cut the bread and butter too thick. I saw
    that with my own eyes. Was it sensibility, I wonder! They were at
    least real tears and ran down her cheeks. 'You always do it'! she
    said.


    Why how you must sympathize with the heroes and heroines of the French
    romances (do you sympathize with them very much?) when at the
    slightest provocation they break up the tables and chairs, (a degree
    beyond the deeds of my childhood!—I only used to upset them) break
    up the tables and chairs and chiffoniers, and dash the china to atoms.
    The men do the furniture, and the women the porcelain: and pray
    observe that they always set about this as a matter of course! When
    they have broken everything in the room, they sink down quite (and
    very naturally) abattus. I remember a particular case of a hero of
    Frederic Soulié's, who, in the course of an 'emotion,' takes up a
    chair unconsciously, and breaks it into very small pieces, and then
    proceeds with his soliloquy. Well!—the clearest idea this excites in
    me, is of the low condition in Paris, of moral government and of
    upholstery. Because—just consider for yourself—how you would
    succeed in breaking to pieces even a three-legged stool if it were
    properly put together—as stools are in England—just yourself,
    without a hammer and a screw! You might work at it comme quatre, and
    find it hard to finish, I imagine. And then as a demonstration, a
    child of six years old might demonstrate just so (in his sphere) and
    be whipped accordingly.


    How I go on writing!—and you, who do not write at all!—two extremes,
    one set against the other.


    But I must say, though in ever such an ill temper (which you know is
    just the time to select for writing a panegyric upon good temper) that
    I am glad you do not despise my own right name too much, because I
    never was called Elizabeth by any one who loved me at all, and I
    accept the omen. So little it seems my name that if a voice said
    suddenly 'Elizabeth,' I should as soon turn round as my sisters would
    ... no sooner. Only, my own right name has been complained of for want
    of euphony ... Ba ... now and then it has—and Mr. Boyd makes a
    compromise and calls me Elibet, because nothing could induce him to
    desecrate his organs accustomed to Attic harmonies, with a Ba. So I
    am glad, and accept the omen.


    But I give you no credit for not thinking that I may forget you ... I!
    As if you did not see the difference! Why, I could not even forget
    to write to you, observe!—


    Whenever you write, say how you are. Were you wet on Wednesday?

Your own—


