
Saturday.
[Post-mark, December 20, 1845.]


    I have your letter now, and now I am sorry I sent mine. If I wrote
    that you had 'forgotten to write,' I did not mean it; not a word! If I
    had meant it I should not have written it. But it would have been
    better for every reason to have waited just a little longer before
    writing at all. A besetting sin of mine is an impatience which makes
    people laugh when it does not entangle their silks, pull their knots
    tighter, and tear their books in cutting them open.


    How right you are about Mr. Lowell! He has a refined fancy and is
    graceful for an American critic, but the truth is, otherwise, that he
    knows nothing of English poetry or the next thing to nothing, and has
    merely had a dream of the early dramatists. The amount of his reading
    in that direction is an article in the Retrospective Review which
    contains extracts; and he re-extracts the extracts, re-quotes the
    quotations, and, 'a pede Herculem,' from the foot infers the man, or
    rather from the sandal-string of the foot, infers and judges the soul
    of the man—it is comparative anatomy under the most speculative
    conditions. How a writer of his talents and pretensions could make up
    his mind to make up a book on such slight substratum, is a curious
    proof of the state of literature in America. Do you not think so? Why
    a lecturer on the English Dramatists for a 'Young Ladies' academy'
    here in England, might take it to be necessary to have better
    information than he could gather from an odd volume of an old review!
    And then, Mr. Lowell's naïveté in showing his authority,—as if the
    Elizabethan poets lay mouldering in inaccessible manuscript somewhere
    below the lowest deep of Shakespeare's grave,—is curious beyond the
    rest! Altogether, the fact is an epigram on the surface-literature of
    America. As you say, their books do not suit us:—Mrs. Markham might
    as well send her compendium of the History of France to M. Thiers. If
    they knew more they could not give parsley crowns to their own
    native poets when there is greater merit among the rabbits. Mrs.
    Sigourney has just sent me—just this morning—her 'Scenes in my
    Native Land' and, peeping between the uncut leaves, I read of the poet
    Hillhouse, of 'sublime spirit and Miltonic energy,' standing in 'the
    temple of Fame' as if it were built on purpose for him. I suppose he
    is like most of the American poets, who are shadows of the true, as
    flat as a shadow, as colourless as a shadow, as lifeless and as
    transitory. Mr. Lowell himself is, in his verse-books, poetical, if
    not a poet—and certainly this little book we are talking of is
    grateful enough in some ways—you would call it a pretty book—would
    you not? Two or three letters I have had from him ... all very
    kind!—and that reminds me, alas! of some ineffable ingratitude on
    my own part! When one's conscience grows too heavy, there is nothing
    for it but to throw it away!—


    Do you remember how I tried to tell you what he said of you, and how
    you would not let me?


    Mr. Mathews said of him, having met him once in society, that he was
    the concentration of conceit in appearance and manner. But since then
    they seem to be on better terms.


    Where is the meaning, pray, of E.B.C.? your meaning, I mean?


    My true initials are E.B.M.B.—my long name, as opposed to my short
    one, being Elizabeth Barrett Moulton Barrett!—there's a full length
    to take away one's breath!—Christian name ... Elizabeth
    Barrett:—surname, Moulton Barrett. So long it is, that to make it
    portable, I fell into the habit of doubling it up and packing it
    closely, ... and of forgetting that I was a Moulton, altogether. One
    might as well write the alphabet as all four initials. Yet our
    family-name is Moulton Barrett, and my brothers reproach me
    sometimes for sacrificing the governorship of an old town in Norfolk
    with a little honourable verdigris from the Heralds' Office. As if I
    cared for the Retrospective Review! Nevertheless it is true that I
    would give ten towns in Norfolk (if I had them) to own some purer
    lineage than that of the blood of the slave! Cursed we are from
    generation to generation!—I seem to hear the 'Commination Service.'


    May God bless you always, always! beyond the always of this world!—

Your           

E.B.B.


    Mr. Dickens's 'Cricket' sings repetitions, and, with considerable
    beauty, is extravagant. It does not appear to me by any means one of
    his most successful productions, though quite free from what was
    reproached as bitterness and one-sidedness, last year.


    You do not say how you are—not a word! And you are wrong in saying
    that you 'ought to have written'—as if 'ought' could be in place
    so! You never 'ought' to write to me you know! or rather ... if
    you ever think you ought, you ought not! Which is a speaking of
    mysteries on my part!


