
Sunday Night.
[Post-mark, December 22, 1845.]


    Now, 'ought' you to be 'sorry you sent that letter,' which made, and
    makes me so happy—so happy—can you bring yourself to turn round and
    tell one you have so blessed with your bounty that there was a
    mistake, and you meant only half that largess? If you are not sensible
    that you do make me most happy by such letters, and do not warm in
    the reflection of your own rays, then I do give up indeed the last
    chance of procuring you happiness. My own 'ought,' which you object
    to, shall be withdrawn—being only a pure bit of selfishness; I felt,
    in missing the letter of yours, next day, that I might have drawn it
    down by one of mine,—if I had begged never so gently, the gold would
    have fallen—there was my omitted duty to myself which you properly
    blame. I should stand silently and wait and be sure of the
    ever-remembering goodness.


    Let me count my gold now—and rub off any speck that stays the full
    shining. First—that thought ... I told you; I pray you, pray you,
    sweet—never that again—or what leads never so remotely or indirectly
    to it! On your own fancied ground, the fulfilment would be of
    necessity fraught with every woe that can fall in this life. I am
    yours for ever—if you are not here, with me—what then? Say, you
    take all of yourself away but just enough to live on; then, that
    defeats every kind purpose ... as if you cut away all the ground from
    my feet but so much as serves for bare standing room ... why still, I
    stand there—and is it the better that I have no broader space,
    when off that you cannot force me? I have your memory, the knowledge
    of you, the idea of you printed into my heart and brain,—on that, I
    can live my life—but it is for you, the dear, utterly generous
    creature I know you, to give me more and more beyond mere life—to
    extend life and deepen it—as you do, and will do. Oh, how I love
    you when I think of the entire truthfulness of your generosity to
    me—how, meaning and willing to give, you gave nobly! Do you think
    I have not seen in this world how women who do love will manage to
    confer that gift on occasion? And shall I allow myself to fancy how
    much alloy such pure gold as your love would have rendered
    endurable? Yet it came, virgin ore, to complete my fortune! And what
    but this makes me confident and happy? Can I take a lesson by your
    fancies, and begin frightening myself with saying ... 'But if she saw
    all the world—the worthier, better men there ... those who would' &c.
    &c. No, I think of the great, dear gift that it was; how I 'won'
    nothing (the hateful word, and French thought)—did nothing by my
    own arts or cleverness in the matter ... so what pretence have the
    more artful or more clever for:—but I cannot write out this
    folly—I am yours for ever, with the utmost sense of gratitude—to say
    I would give you my life joyfully is little.... I would, I hope, do
    that for two or three other people—but I am not conscious of any
    imaginable point in which I would not implicitly devote my whole self
    to you—be disposed of by you as for the best. There! It is not to be
    spoken of—let me live it into proof, beloved!


    And for 'disappointment and a burden' ... now—let us get quite away
    from ourselves, and not see one of the filaments, but only the cords
    of love with the world's horny eye. Have we such jarring tastes, then?
    Does your inordinate attachment to gay life interfere with my deep
    passion for society? 'Have they common sympathy in each other's
    pursuits?'—always asks Mrs. Tomkins! Well, here was I when you knew
    me, fixed in my way of life, meaning with God's help to write what
    may be written and so die at peace with myself so far. Can you help me
    or no? Do you not help me so much that, if you saw the more likely
    peril for poor human nature, you would say, 'He will be jealous of all
    the help coming from me,—none from him to me!'—And that would be a
    consequence of the help, all-too-great for hope of return, with any
    one less possessed than I with the exquisiteness of being
    transcended and the blest one.


    But—'here comes the Selah and the voice is hushed'—I will speak of
    other things. When we are together one day—the days I believe in—I
    mean to set about that reconsidering 'Sordello'—it has always been
    rather on my mind—but yesterday I was reading the 'Purgatorio' and
    the first speech of the group of which Sordello makes one struck me
    with a new significance, as well describing the man and his purpose
    and fate in my own poem—see; one of the burthened, contorted souls
    tells Virgil and Dante—

Noi fummo già tutti per forza morti,
E peccatori infin' all' ultim' ora:
Quivi—lume del ciel ne fece accorti
Si chè, pentendo e perdonando, fora
Di vita uscimmo a Dio pacificati
Che del disio di se veder n'accora.23


Which is just my Sordello's story ... could I 'do' it off hand, I
    wonder—

And sinners were we to the extreme hour;
    Then, light from heaven fell, making us aware,
So that, repenting us and pardoned, out
Of life we passed to God, at peace with Him
Who fills the heart with yearning Him to see.



    There were many singular incidents attending my work on that
    subject—thus, quite at the end, I found out there was printed and
    not published, a little historical tract by a Count V—— something,
    called 'Sordello'—with the motto 'Post fata resurgam'! I hope he
    prophesied. The main of this—biographical notices—is extracted by
    Muratori, I think. Last year when I set foot in Naples I found after a
    few minutes that at some theatre, that night, the opera was to be 'one
    act of Sordello' and I never looked twice, nor expended a couple of
    carlines on the libretto!


    I wanted to tell you, in last letter, that when I spoke of people's
    tempers you have no concern with 'people'—I do not glance obliquely
    at your temper—either to discover it, or praise it, or adapt myself
    to it. I speak of the relation one sees in other cases—how one
    opposes passionate foolish people, but hates cold clever people who
    take quite care enough of themselves. I myself am born supremely
    passionate—so I was born with light yellow hair: all changes—that is
    the passion changes its direction and, taking a channel large enough,
    looks calmer, perhaps, than it should—and all my sympathies go with
    quiet strength, of course—but I know what the other kind is. As for
    the breakages of chairs, and the appreciation of Parisian meubles;
    manibus, pedibusque descendo in tuam sententiam, Ba, mi ocelle! ('What
    was E.B. C?' why, the first letter after, and not, E.B. B, my own
    B! There was no latent meaning in the C—but I had no inclination to
    go on to D, or E, for instance).


    And so, love, Tuesday is to be our day—one day more—and then! And
    meanwhile 'care' for me! a good word for you—but my care, what is
    that! One day I aspire to care, though! I shall not go away at any
    dear Mr. K.'s coming! They call me down-stairs to supper—and my fire
    is out, and you keep me from feeling cold and yet ask if I am well?
    Yes, well—yes, happy—and your own ever—I must bid God bless
    you—dearest!

R.B.


