
25th Dec. [1845.]


    My dear Christmas gift of a letter! I will write back a few lines,
    (all I can, having to go out now)—just that I may forever,—certainly
    during our mortal 'forever'—mix my love for you, and, as you suffer
    me to say, your love for me ... dearest! ... these shall be mixed with
    the other loves of the day and live therein—as I write, and trust,
    and know—forever! While I live I will remember what was my feeling in
    reading, and in writing, and in stopping from either ... as I have
    just done ... to kiss you and bless you with my whole heart.—Yes,
    yes, bless you, my own!


    All is right, all of your letter ... admirably right and just in the
    defence of the women I seemed to speak against; and only
    seemed—because that is a way of mine which you must have observed;
    that foolish concentrating of thought and feeling, for a moment, on
    some one little spot of a character or anything else indeed, and in
    the attempt to do justice and develop whatever may seem ordinarily to
    be overlooked in it,—that over vehement insisting on, and giving an
    undue prominence to, the same—which has the effect of taking away
    from the importance of the rest of the related objects which, in
    truth, are not considered at all ... or they would also rise
    proportionally when subjected to the same (that is, correspondingly
    magnified and dilated) light and concentrated feeling. So, you
    remember, the old divine, preaching on 'small sins,' in his zeal to
    expose the tendencies and consequences usually made little account of,
    was led to maintain the said small sins to be 'greater than great
    ones.' But then ... if you look on the world altogether, and
    accept the small natures, in their usual proportion with the greater
    ... things do not look quite so bad; because the conduct which is
    atrocious in those higher cases, of proposal and acceptance, may be
    no more than the claims of the occasion justify (wait and hear) in
    certain other cases where the thing sought for and granted is avowedly
    less by a million degrees. It shall all be traffic, exchange (counting
    spiritual gifts as only coin, for our purpose), but surely the
    formalities and policies and decencies all vary with the nature of the
    thing trafficked for. If a man makes up his mind during half his life
    to acquire a Pitt-diamond or a Pilgrim-pearl—[he] gets witnesses and
    testimony and so forth—but, surely, when I pass a shop where oranges
    are ticketed up seven for sixpence I offend no law by sparing all
    words and putting down the piece with a certain authoritative ring on
    the counter. If instead of diamonds you want—(being a king or
    queen)—provinces with live men on them ... there is so much more
    diplomacy required; new interests are appealed to—high motives
    supposed, at all events—whereas, when, in Naples, a man asks leave
    to black your shoe in the dusty street 'purely for the honour of
    serving your Excellency' you laugh and would be sorry to find yourself
    without a 'grano' or two—(six of which, about, make a farthing)—Now
    do you not see! Where so little is to be got, why offer much more? If
    a man knows that ... but I am teaching you! All I mean is, that, in
    Benedick's phrase, 'the world must go on.' He who honestly wants his
    wife to sit at the head of his table and carve ... that is be his
    help-meat (not 'help mete for him')—he shall assuredly find a girl
    of his degree who wants the table to sit at; and some dear friend to
    mortify, who would be glad of such a piece of fortune; and if that
    man offers that woman a bunch of orange-flowers and a sonnet, instead
    of a buck-horn-handled sabre-shaped knife, sheathed in a 'Every Lady
    Her Own Market-Woman, Being a Table of' &c. &c.—then, I say he
    is—


    Bless you, dearest—the clock strikes—and time is none—but—bless
    you!

Your own R.B.


