
Saturday.
[Post-mark, December 27, 1845.]


    Yes, indeed, I have 'observed that way' in you, and not once, and not
    twice, and not twenty times, but oftener than any,—and almost every
    time ... do you know, ... with an uncomfortable feeling from the
    reflection that that is the way for making all sorts of mistakes
    dependent on and issuing in exaggeration. It is the very way!—the
    highway.


    For what you say in the letter here otherwise, I do not deny the
    truth—as partial truth:—I was speaking generally quite. Admit that I
    am not apt to be extravagant in my esprit de sexe: the Martineau
    doctrines of intellectual equality &c., I gave them up, you remember,
    like a woman—most disgracefully, as Mrs. Jameson would tell me. But
    we are not on that ground now—we are on ground worth holding a brief
    for!—and when women fail here ... it is not so much our fault.
    Which was all I meant to say from the beginning.


    It reminds me of the exquisite analysis in your 'Luria,' this third
    act, of the worth of a woman's sympathy,—indeed of the exquisite
    double-analysis of unlearned and learned sympathies. Nothing could be
    better, I think, than this:—

To the motive, the endeavour,—the heart's self—
Your quick sense looks; you crown and call aright
The soul of the purpose ere 'tis shaped as act,
Takes flesh i' the world, and clothes itself a king;


except the characterizing of the 'learned praise,' which comes
    afterwards in its fine subtle truth. What would these critics do to
    you, to what degree undo you, who would deprive you of the exercise of
    the discriminative faculty of the metaphysicians? As if a poet could
    be great without it! They might as well recommend a watchmaker to deal
    only in faces, in dials, and not to meddle with the wheels inside!
    You shall tell Mr. Forster so.


    And speaking of 'Luria,' which grows on me the more I read, ... how
    fine he is when the doubt breaks on him—I mean, when he begins ...
    'Why then, all is very well.' It is most affecting, I think, all that
    process of doubt ... and that reference to the friends at home (which
    at once proves him a stranger, and intimates, by just a stroke, that
    he will not look home for comfort out of the new foreign treason) is
    managed by you with singular dramatic dexterity....

        ... 'so slight, so slight,
And yet it tells you they are dead and gone'—


And then, the direct approach....

You now, so kind here, all you Florentines,
What is it in your eyes?—


    Do you not feel it to be success, ... 'you now?' I do, from my low
    ground as reader. The whole breaking round him of the cloud, and the
    manner in which he stands, facing it, ... I admire it all
    thoroughly. Braccio's vindication of Florence strikes me as almost too
    poetically subtle for the man—but nobody could have the heart to
    wish a line of it away—that would be too much for critical virtue!


    I had your letter yesterday morning early. The post-office people were
    so resolved on keeping their Christmas, that they would not let me
    keep mine. No post all day, after that general post before noon, which
    never brings me anything worth the breaking of a seal!


    Am I to see you on Monday? If there should be the least, least
    crossing of that day, ... anything to do, anything to see, anything to
    listen to,—remember how Tuesday stands close by, and that another
    Monday comes on the following week. Now I need not say that every
    time, and you will please to remember it—Eccellenza!—

May God bless you—
Your
E.B.B.


    From the New Monthly Magazine. 'The admirers of Robert Browning's
    poetry, and they are now very numerous, will be glad to hear of the
    issue by Mr. Moxon of a seventh series of the renowned "Bells" and
    delicious "Pomegranates," under the title of "Dramatic Romances and
    Lyrics."'


