
Tuesday.
[Post-mark, December 30, 1845.]


    When you are gone I find your flowers; and you never spoke of nor
    showed them to me—so instead of yesterday I thank you to-day—thank
    you. Count among the miracles that your flowers live with me—I accept
    that for an omen, dear—dearest! Flowers in general, all other
    flowers, die of despair when they come into the same atmosphere ...
    used to do it so constantly and observably that it made me melancholy
    and I left off for the most part having them here. Now you see how
    they put up with the close room, and condescend to me and the dust—it
    is true and no fancy! To be sure they know that I care for them and
    that I stand up by the table myself to change their water and cut
    their stalk freshly at intervals—that may make a difference
    perhaps. Only the great reason must be that they are yours, and that
    you teach them to bear with me patiently.


    Do not pretend even to misunderstand what I meant to say yesterday of
    dear Mr. Kenyon. His blame would fall as my blame of myself has
    fallen: he would say—will say—'it is ungenerous of her to let such a
    risk be run! I thought she would have been more generous.' There, is
    Mr. Kenyon's opinion as I foresee it! Not that it would be spoken, you
    know! he is too kind. And then, he said to me last summer, somewhere
    à propos to the flies or butterflies, that he had 'long ceased to
    wonder at any extreme of foolishness produced by—love.' He will of
    course think you very very foolish, but not ungenerously foolish like
    other people.


    Never mind. I do not mind indeed. I mean, that, having said to myself
    worse than the worst perhaps of what can be said against me by any who
    regard me at all, and feeling it put to silence by the fact that you
    do feel so and so for me; feeling that fact to be an answer to
    all,—I cannot mind much, in comparison, the railing at second remove.
    There will be a nine days' railing of it and no more: and if on the
    ninth day you should not exactly wish never to have known me, the
    better reason will be demonstrated to stand with us. On this one point
    the wise man cannot judge for the fool his neighbour. If you do love
    me, the inference is that you would be happier with than without
    me—and whether you do, you know better than another: so I think of
    you and not of them—always of you! When I talked of being
    afraid of dear Mr. Kenyon, I just meant that he makes me nervous with
    his all-scrutinizing spectacles, put on for great occasions, and his
    questions which seem to belong to the spectacles, they go together
    so:—and then I have no presence of mind, as you may see without the
    spectacles. My only way of hiding (when people set themselves to look
    for me) would be the old child's way of getting behind the window
    curtains or under the sofa:—and even that might not be effectual if
    I had recourse to it now. Do you think it would? Two or three times I
    fancied that Mr. Kenyon suspected something—but if he ever did, his
    only reproof was a reduplicated praise of you—he praises you always
    and in relation to every sort of subject.


    What a misomonsism you fell into yesterday, you who have much great
    work to do which no one else can do except just yourself!—and you,
    too, who have courage and knowledge, and must know that every work,
    with the principle of life in it, will live, let it be trampled ever
    so under the heel of a faithless and unbelieving generation—yes, that
    it will live like one of your toads, for a thousand years in the heart
    of a rock. All men can teach at second or third hand, as you said ...
    by prompting the foremost rows ... by tradition and translation:—all,
    except poets, who must preach their own doctrine and sing their own
    song, to be the means of any wisdom or any music, and therefore have
    stricter duties thrust upon them, and may not lounge in the στοα
    like the conversation-teachers. So much I have to say to you,
    till we are in the Siren's island—and I, jealous of the Siren!—

The Siren waits thee singing song for song,

says Mr. Landor. A prophecy which refuses to class you with the 'mute
    fishes,' precisely as I do.


    And are you not my 'good'—all my good now—my only good ever? The
    Italians would say it better without saying more.


    I had a letter from Miss Martineau this morning who accounts for her
    long silence by the supposition,—put lately to an end by scarcely
    credible information from Mr. Moxon, she says—that I was out of
    England; gone to the South from the 20th of September. She calls
    herself the strongest of women, and talks of 'walking fifteen miles
    one day and writing fifteen pages another day without fatigue,'—also
    of mesmerizing and of being infinitely happy except in the continued
    alienation of two of her family who cannot forgive her for getting
    well by such unlawful means. And she is to write again to tell me of
    Wordsworth, and promises to send me her new work in the meanwhile—all
    very kind.


    So here is my letter to you, which you asked for so 'against the
    principles of universal justice.' Yes, very unjust—very unfair it
    was—only, you make me do just as you like in everything. Now confess
    to your own conscience that even if I had not a lawful claim of a debt
    against you, I might come to ask charity with another sort of claim,
    oh 'son of humanity.' Think how much more need of a letter I have
    than you can have; and that if you have a giant's power, ''tis
    tyrannous to use it like a giant.' Who would take tribute from the
    desert? How I grumble. Do let me have a letter directly! remember
    that no other light comes to my windows, and that I wait 'as those who
    watch for the morning'—'lux mea!'


    May God bless you—and mind to say how you are exactly, and don't
    neglect the walking, pray do not.

Your own


    And after all, those women! A great deal of doctrine commends and
    discommends itself by the delivery: and an honest thing may be said so
    foolishly as to disprove its very honesty. Now after all, what did she
    mean by that very silly expression about books, but that she did not
    feel as she considered herself capable of feeling—and that else but
    that was the meaning of the other woman? Perhaps it should have been
    spoken earlier—nay, clearly it should—but surely it was better
    spoken even in the last hour than not at all ... surely it is always
    and under all circumstances, better spoken at whatever cost—I have
    thought so steadily since I could think or feel at all. An entire
    openness to the last moment of possible liberty, at whatever cost and
    consequence, is the most honourable and most merciful way, both for
    men and women! perhaps for men in an especial manner. But I shall send
    this letter away, being in haste to get change for it.


