
Wednesday, December 31, 1845.


    I have been properly punished for so much treachery as went to that
    re-urging the prayer that you would begin writing, when all the time
    (after the first of those words had been spoken which bade me write)
    I was full of purpose to send my own note last evening; one which
    should do its best to thank you: but see, the punishment! At home I
    found a note from Mr. Horne—on the point of setting out for Ireland,
    too unwell to manage to come over to me; anxious, so he said, to see
    me before leaving London, and with only Tuesday or to-day to allow the
    opportunity of it, if I should choose to go and find him out. So I
    considered all things and determined to go—but not till so late did I
    determine on Tuesday, that there was barely time to get to
    Highgate—wherefore no letter reached you to beg pardon ... and now
    this undeserved—beyond the usual undeservedness—this
    last-day-of-the-Year's gift—do you think or not think my gratitude
    weighs on me? When I lay this with the others, and remember what you
    have done for me—I do bless you—so as I cannot but believe must
    reach the all-beloved head all my hopes and fancies and cares fly
    straight to. Dearest, whatever change the new year brings with it, we
    are together—I can give you no more of myself—indeed, you give me
    now (back again if you choose, but changed and renewed by your
    possession) the powers that seemed most properly mine. I could only
    mean that, by the expressions to which you refer—only could mean that
    you were my crown and palm branch, now and for ever, and so, that it
    was a very indifferent matter to me if the world took notice of that
    fact or no. Yes, dearest, that is the meaning of the prophecy, which
    I was stupidly blind not to have read and taken comfort from long ago.
    You ARE the veritable Siren—and you 'wait me,' and will sing 'song
    for song.' And this is my first song, my true song—this love I bear
    you—I look into my heart and then let it go forth under that
    name—love. I am more than mistrustful of many other feelings in me:
    they are not earnest enough; so far, not true enough—but this is all
    the flower of my life which you call forth and which lies at your
    feet.


    Now let me say it—what you are to remember. That if I had the
    slightest doubt, or fear, I would utter it to you on the
    instant—secure in the incontested stability of the main fact, even
    though the heights at the verge in the distance should tremble and
    prove vapour—and there would be a deep consolation in your
    forgiveness—indeed, yes; but I tell you, on solemn consideration, it
    does seem to me that—once take away the broad and general words that
    admit in their nature of any freight they can be charged with,—put
    aside love, and devotion, and trust—and then I seem to have said
    nothing of my feeling to you—nothing whatever.


    I will not write more now on this subject. Believe you are my blessing
    and infinite reward beyond possible desert in intention,—my life has
    been crowned by you, as I said!


    May God bless you ever—through you I shall be blessed. May I kiss
    your cheek and pray this, my own, all-beloved?


    I must add a word or two of other things. I am very well now, quite
    well—am walking and about to walk. Horne, or rather his friends,
    reside in the very lane Keats loved so much—Millfield Lane. Hunt lent
    me once the little copy of the first Poems dedicated to him—and on
    the title-page was recorded in Hunt's delicate characters that 'Keats
    met him with this, the presentation-copy, or whatever was the odious
    name, in M—— Lane—called Poets' Lane by the gods—Keats came
    running, holding it up in his hand.' Coleridge had an affection for
    the place, and Shelley 'knew' it—and I can testify it is green and
    silent, with pleasant openings on the grounds and ponds, through the
    old trees that line it. But the hills here are far more open and wild
    and hill-like; not with the eternal clump of evergreens and thatched
    summer house—to say nothing of the 'invisible railing' miserably
    visible everywhere.


    You very well know what a vision it is you give me—when you speak
    of standing up by the table to care for my flowers—(which I will
    never be ashamed of again, by the way—I will say for the future;
    'here are my best'—in this as in other things.) Now, do you remember,
    that once I bade you not surprise me out of my good behaviour by
    standing to meet me unawares, as visions do, some day—but now—omne
    ignotum? No, dearest!


    Ought I to say there will be two days more? till Saturday—and if one
    word comes, one line—think! I am wholly yours—yours, beloved!

R.B.


