
January 1, 1845 [1846].


    How good you are—how best! it is a favourite play of my memory to
    take up the thought of what you were to me (to my mind gazing!) years
    ago, as the poet in an abstraction—then the thoughts of you, a little
    clearer, in concrete personality, as Mr. Kenyon's friend, who had
    dined with him on such a day, or met him at dinner on such another,
    and said some great memorable thing 'on Wednesday last,' and enquired
    kindly about me perhaps on Thursday,—till I was proud! and so, the
    thoughts of you, nearer and nearer (yet still afar!) as the Mr.
    Browning who meant to do me the honour of writing to me, and who did
    write; and who asked me once in a letter (does he remember?) 'not to
    lean out of the window while his foot was on the stair!'—to take up
    all those thoughts, and more than those, one after another, and tie
    them together with all these, which cannot be named so easily—which
    cannot be classed in botany and Greek. It is a nosegay of mystical
    flowers, looking strangely and brightly, and keeping their May-dew
    through the Christmases—better than even your flowers! And I am not
    'ashamed' of mine, ... be very sure! no!


    For the siren, I never suggested to you any such thing—why you do not
    pretend to have read such a suggestion in my letter certainly. That
    would have been most exemplarily modest of me! would it not, O
    Ulysses?


    And you meant to write, ... you meant! and went to walk in 'Poet's
    lane' instead, (in the 'Aonius of Highgate') which I remember to have
    read of—does not Hunt speak of it in his Memoirs?—and so now there
    is another track of light in the traditions of the place, and people
    may talk of the pomegranate-smell between the hedges. So you really
    have hills at New Cross, and not hills by courtesy? I was at
    Hampstead once—and there was something attractive to me in that
    fragment of heath with its wild smell, thrown down ... like a Sicilian
    rose from Proserpine's lap when the car drove away, ... into all that
    arid civilization, 'laurel-clumps and invisible visible fences,' as
    you say!—and the grand, eternal smoke rising up in the distance, with
    its witness against nature! People grew severely in jest about cockney
    landscape—but is it not true that the trees and grass in the close
    neighbourhood of great cities must of necessity excite deeper emotion
    than the woods and valleys will, a hundred miles off, where human
    creatures ruminate stupidly as the cows do, the 'county families'
    es-chewing all men who are not 'landed proprietors,' and the farmers
    never looking higher than to the fly on the uppermost turnip-leaf! Do
    you know at all what English country-life is, which the English praise
    so, and 'moralize upon into a thousand similes,' as that one greatest,
    purest, noblest thing in the world—the purely English and excellent
    thing? It is to my mind simply and purely abominable, and I would
    rather live in a street than be forced to live it out,—that English
    country-life; for I don't mean life in the country. The social
    exigencies—why, nothing can be so bad—nothing! That is the way by
    which Englishmen grow up to top the world in their peculiar line of
    respectable absurdities.


    Think of my talking so as if I could be vexed with any one of them!
    I!—On the contrary I wish them all a happy new year to abuse one
    another, or visit each of them his nearest neighbour whom he hates,
    three times a week, because 'the distance is so convenient,' and give
    great dinners in noble rivalship (venison from the Lord Lieutenant
    against turbot from London!), and talk popularity and game-law by
    turns to the tenantry, and beat down tithes to the rector. This
    glorious England of ours; with its peculiar glory of the rural
    districts! And my glory of patriotic virtue, who am so happy in
    spite of it all, and make a pretence of talking—talking—while I
    think the whole time of your letter. I think of your letter—I am no
    more a patriot than that!


    May God bless you, best and dearest! You say things to me which I am
    not worthy to listen to for a moment, even if I was deaf dust the next
    moment.... I confess it humbly and earnestly as before God.


    Yet He knows,—if the entireness of a gift means anything,—that I
    have not given with a reserve, that I am yours in my life and soul,
    for this year and for other years. Let me be used for you rather
    than against you! and that unspeakable, immeasurable grief of
    feeling myself a stone in your path, a cloud in your sky, may I be
    saved from it!—pray it for me ... for my sake rather than
    yours. For the rest, I thank you, I thank you. You will be always to
    me, what to-day you are—and that is all!—!

I am your own—


