
Sunday Night.
[Post-mark, January 5, 1846.]


    Yesterday, nearly the last thing, I bade you 'think of me'—I wonder
    if you could misunderstand me in that?—As if my words or actions or
    any of my ineffectual outside-self should be thought of, unless to
    be forgiven! But I do, dearest, feel confident that while I am in your
    mind—cared for, rather than thought about—no great harm can happen
    to me; and as, for great harm to reach me, it must pass through you,
    you will care for yourself; myself, best self!


    Come, let us talk. I found Horne's book at home, and have had time to
    see that fresh beautiful things are there—I suppose 'Delora' will
    stand alone still—but I got pleasantly smothered with that odd shower
    of wood-spoils at the end, the dwarf-story; cup-masses and fern and
    spotty yellow leaves,—all that, I love heartily—and there is good
    sailor-speech in the 'Ben Capstan'—though he does knock a man down
    with a 'crow-bar'—instead of a marling-spike or, even, a
    belaying-pin! The first tale, though good, seems least new and
    individual, but I must know more. At one thing I wonder—his not
    reprinting a quaint clever real ballad, published before 'Delora,'
    on the 'Merry Devil of Edmonton'—the first of his works I ever read.
    No, the very first piece was a single stanza, if I remember, in which
    was this line: 'When bason-crested Quixote, lean and bold,'—good, is
    it not? Oh, while it strikes me, good, too, is that 'Swineshead
    Monk' ballad! Only I miss the old chronicler's touch on the method of
    concocting the poison: 'Then stole this Monk into the Garden and under
    a certain herb found out a Toad, which, squeezing into a cup,' &c.
    something to that effect. I suspect, par parenthèse, you have found
    out by this time my odd liking for 'vermin'—you once wrote 'your
    snails'—and certainly snails are old clients of mine—but efts! Horne
    traced a line to me—in the rhymes of a ''prentice-hand' I used to
    look over and correct occasionally—taxed me (last week) with having
    altered the wise line 'Cold as a lizard in a sunny stream' to
    'Cold as a newt hid in a shady brook'—for 'what do you know about
    newts?' he asked of the author—who thereupon confessed. But never try
    and catch a speckled gray lizard when we are in Italy, love, and you
    see his tail hang out of the chink of a wall, his
    winter-house—because the strange tail will snap off, drop from him
    and stay in your fingers—and though you afterwards learn that there
    is more desperation in it and glorious determination to be free, than
    positive pain (so people say who have no tails to be twisted off)—and
    though, moreover, the tail grows again after a sort—yet ... don't
    do it, for it will give you a thrill! What a fine fellow our English
    water-eft is; 'Triton paludis Linnaei'—e come guizza (that you
    can't say in another language; cannot preserve the little in-and-out
    motion along with the straightforwardness!)—I always loved all those
    wild creatures God 'sets up for themselves' so independently of us,
    so successfully, with their strange happy minute inch of a candle, as
    it were, to light them; while we run about and against each other with
    our great cressets and fire-pots. I once saw a solitary bee nipping a
    leaf round till it exactly fitted the front of a hole; his nest, no
    doubt; or tomb, perhaps—'Safe as Oedipus's grave-place, 'mid Colone's
    olives swart'—(Kiss me, my Siren!)—Well, it seemed awful to watch
    that bee—he seemed so instantly from the teaching of God! Ælian
    says that ... a frog, does he say?—some animal, having to swim
    across the Nile, never fails to provide himself with a bit of reed,
    which he bites off and holds in his mouth transversely and so puts
    from shore gallantly ... because when the water-serpent comes swimming
    to meet him, there is the reed, wider than his serpent's jaws, and no
    hopes of a swallow that time—now fancy the two meeting heads, the
    frog's wide eyes and the vexation of the snake!


    Now, see! do I deceive you? Never say I began by letting down my
    dignity 'that with no middle flight intends to soar above the Aonian
    Mount'!—


    My best, dear, dear one,—may you be better, less depressed, ... I
    can hardly imagine frost reaching you if I could be by you. Think what
    happiness you mean to give me,—what a life; what a death! 'I may
    change'—too true; yet, you see, as an eft was to me at the beginning
    so it continues—I may take up stones and pelt the next I
    see—but—do you much fear that?—Now, walk, move, guizza, anima
    mia dolce. Shall I not know one day how far your mouth will be from
    mine as we walk? May I let that stay ... dearest, (the line stay,
    not the mouth)?


    I am not very well to-day—or, rather, have not been so—now, I am
    well and with you. I just say that, very needlessly, but for strict
    frankness' sake. Now, you are to write to me soon, and tell me all
    about your self, and to love me ever, as I love you ever, and bless
    you, and leave you in the hands of God—My own love!—


    Tell me if I do wrong to send this by a morning post—so as to reach
    you earlier than the evening—when you will ... write to me?


    Don't let me forget to say that I shall receive the Review
    to-morrow, and will send it directly.


