
Sunday.
[Post-mark, January 6, 1846.]


    When you get Mr. Horne's book you will understand how, after reading
    just the first and the last poems, I could not help speaking coldly a
    little of it—and in fact, estimating his power as much as you can do,
    I did think and do, that the last was unworthy of him, and that the
    first might have been written by a writer of one tenth of his faculty.
    But last night I read the 'Monk of Swineshead Abbey' and the 'Three
    Knights of Camelott' and 'Bedd Gelert' and found them all of different
    stuff, better, stronger, more consistent, and read them with pleasure
    and admiration. Do you remember this application, among the countless
    ones of shadow to the transiency of life? I give the first two lines
    for clearness—

Like to the cloud upon the hill
We are a moment seen
Or the shadow of the windmill-sail
Across yon sunny slope of green.


New or not, and I don't remember it elsewhere, it is just and
    beautiful I think. Think how the shadow of the windmill-sail just
    touches the ground on a bright windy day! the shadow of a bird flying
    is not faster! Then the 'Three Knights' has beautiful things, with
    more definite and distinct images than he is apt to show—for his
    character is a vague grand massiveness,—like Stonehenge—or at least,
    if 'towers and battlements he sees' they are 'bosomed high' in dusky
    clouds ... it is a 'passion-created imagery' which has no clear
    outline. In this ballad of the 'Knights,' and in the Monk's too, we
    may look at things, as on the satyr who swears by his horns and
    mates not with his kind afterwards, 'While, holding beards, they
    dance in pairs—and that is all excellent and reminds one of those
    fine sylvan festivals, 'in Orion.' But now tell me if you like
    altogether 'Ben Capstan' and if you consider the sailor-idiom to be
    lawful in poetry, because I do not indeed. On the same principle we
    may have Yorkshire and Somersetshire 'sweet Doric'; and do recollect
    what it ended in of old, in the Blowsibella heroines. Then for the Elf
    story ... why should such things be written by men like Mr. Horne? I
    am vexed at it. Shakespeare and Fletcher did not write so about
    fairies:—Drayton did not. Look at the exquisite 'Nymphidia,' with its
    subtle sylvan consistency, and then at the lumbering coarse ...
    'machina intersit' ... Grandmama Grey!—to say nothing of the 'small
    dog' that isn't the 'small boy.' Mr. Horne succeeds better on a larger
    canvass, and with weightier material; with blank verse rather than
    lyrics. He cannot make a fine stroke. He wants subtlety and elasticity
    in the thought and expression. Remember, I admire him honestly and
    earnestly. No one has admired more than I the 'Death of Marlowe,'
    scenes in 'Cosmo,' and 'Orion' in much of it. But now tell me if you
    can accept with the same stretched out hand all these lyrical poems? I
    am going to write to him as much homage as can come truly. Who
    combines different faculties as you do, striking the whole octave? No
    one, at present in the world.


    Dearest, after you went away yesterday and I began to consider, I
    found that there was nothing to be so over-glad about in the matter
    of the letters, for that, Sunday coming next to Saturday, the best now
    is only as good as the worst before, and I can't hear from you, until
    Monday ... Monday! Did you think of that—you who took the credit of
    acceding so meekly! I shall not praise you in return at any rate. I
    shall have to wait ... till what o'clock on Monday, tempted in the
    meanwhile to fall into controversy against the 'new moons and sabbath
    days' and the pausing of the post in consequence.


    You never guessed perhaps, what I look back to at this moment in the
    physiology of our intercourse, the curious double feeling I had about
    you—you personally, and you as the writer of these letters, and the
    crisis of the feeling, when I was positively vexed and jealous of
    myself for not succeeding better in making a unity of the two. I could
    not! And moreover I could not help but that the writer of the letters
    seemed nearer to me, long ... long ... and in spite of the postmark,
    than did the personal visitor who confounded me, and left me
    constantly under such an impression of its being all dream-work on his
    side, that I have stamped my feet on this floor with impatience to
    think of having to wait so many hours before the 'candid' closing
    letter could come with its confessional of an illusion. 'People say,'
    I used to think, 'that women always know, and certainly I do not
    know, and therefore ... therefore.'—The logic crushed on like
    Juggernaut's car. But in the letters it was different—the dear
    letters took me on the side of my own ideal life where I was able to
    stand a little upright and look round. I could read such letters for
    ever and answer them after a fashion ... that, I felt from the
    beginning. But you—!


    Monday.—Never too early can the light come. Thank you for my
    letter! Yet you look askance at me over 'newt and toad,' and praise so
    the Elf-story that I am ashamed to send you my ill humour on the same
    head. And you really like that? admire it? Grandmama Grey and the
    night cap and all? and 'shoetye and blue sky?' and is it really wrong
    of me to like certainly some touches and images, but not the whole,
    ... not the poem as a whole? I can take delight in the fantastical,
    and in the grotesque—but here there is a want of life and
    consistency, as it seems to me!—the elf is no elf and speaks no
    elf-tongue: it is not the right key to touch, ... this, ... for
    supernatural music. So I fancy at least—but I will try the poem again
    presently. You must be right—unless it should be your over-goodness
    opposed to my over-badness—I will not be sure. Or you wrote perhaps
    in an accidental mood of most excellent critical smoothness, such as
    Mr. Forster did his last Examiner in, when he gave the all-hail to
    Mr. Harness as one of the best dramatists of the age!! Ah no!—not
    such as Mr. Forster's. Your soul does not enter into his secret—There
    can be nothing in common between you. For him to say such a word—he
    who knows—or ought to know!—And now let us agree and admire the
    bowing of the old ministrel over Bedd Gelert's unfilled grave—

The long beard fell like snow into the grave
                
With solemn grace

A poet, a friend, a generous man Mr. Horne is, even if no laureate for
    the fairies.


    I have this moment a parcel of books via Mr. Moxon—Miss Martineau's
    two volumes—and Mr. Bailey sends his 'Festus,' very kindly, ... and
    'Woman in the Nineteenth Century' from America from a Mrs. or a Miss
    Fuller—how I hate those 'Women of England,' 'Women and their Mission'
    and the rest. As if any possible good were to be done by such
    expositions of rights and wrongs.


    Your letter would be worth them all, if you were less you! I mean,
    just this letter, ... all alive as it is with crawling buzzing
    wriggling cold-blooded warm-blooded creatures ... as all alive as your
    own pedant's book in the tree. And do you know, I think I like frogs
    too—particularly the very little leaping frogs, which are so
    high-hearted as to emulate the birds. I remember being scolded by my
    nurses for taking them up in my hands and letting them leap from one
    hand to the other. But for the toad!—why, at the end of the row of
    narrow beds which we called our gardens when we were children, grew an
    old thorn, and in the hollow of the root of the thorn, lived a toad, a
    great ancient toad, whom I, for one, never dared approach too nearly.
    That he 'wore a jewel in his head' I doubted nothing at all. You must
    see it glitter if you stooped and looked steadily into the hole. And
    on days when he came out and sate swelling his black sides, I never
    looked steadily; I would run a hundred yards round through the shrubs,
    deeper than knee-deep in the long wet grass and nettles, rather than
    go past him where he sate; being steadily of opinion, in the
    profundity of my natural history-learning, that if he took it into his
    toad's head to spit at me I should drop down dead in a moment,
    poisoned as by one of the Medici.


    Oh—and I had a field-mouse for a pet once, and should have joined my
    sisters in a rat's nest if I had not been ill at the time (as it was,
    the little rats were tenderly smothered by over-love!): and
    blue-bottle flies I used to feed, and hated your spiders for them; yet
    no, not much. My aversion proper ... call it horror rather ... was for
    the silent, cold, clinging, gliding bat; and even now, I think, I
    could not sleep in the room with that strange bird-mouse-creature, as
    it glides round the ceiling silently, silently as its shadow does on
    the floor. If you listen or look, there is not a wave of the wing—the
    wing never waves! A bird without a feather! a beast that flies! and so
    cold! as cold as a fish! It is the most supernatural-seeming of
    natural things. And then to see how when the windows are open at night
    those bats come sailing ... without a sound—and go ... you cannot
    guess where!—fade with the night-blackness!


    You have not been well—which is my first thought if not my first
    word. Do walk, and do not work; and think ... what I could be thinking
    of, if I did not think of you ... dear—dearest! 'As the doves fly
    to the windows,' so I think of you! As the prisoners think of liberty,
    as the dying think of Heaven, so I think of you. When I look up
    straight to God ... nothing, no one, used to intercept me—now there
    is you—only you under him! Do not use such words as those therefore
    any more, nor say that you are not to be thought of so and so. You are
    to be thought of every way. You must know what you are to me if you
    know at all what I am,—and what I should be but for you.


    So ... love me a little, with the spiders and the toads and the
    lizards! love me as you love the efts—and I will believe in you as
    you believe ... in Ælian—Will that do?

Your own—


    Say how you are when you write—and write.


