
Tuesday Night.
[Post-mark, January 7, 1846.]


    But, my sweet, there is safer going in letters than in visits, do you
    not see? In the letter, one may go to the utmost limit of one's
    supposed tether without danger—there is the distance so palpably
    between the most audacious step there, and the next ... which is
    nowhere, seeing it is not in the letter. Quite otherwise in personal
    intercourse, where any indication of turning to a certain path, even,
    might possibly be checked not for its own fault but lest, the path
    once reached and proceeded in, some other forbidden turning might come
    into sight, we will say. In the letter, all ended there, just there
    ... and you may think of that, and forgive; at all events, may avoid
    speaking irrevocable words—and when, as to me, those words are
    intensely true, doom-words—think, dearest! Because, as I told you
    once, what most characterizes my feeling for you is the perfect
    respect in it, the full belief ... (I shall get presently to poor
    Robert's very avowal of 'owing you all esteem'!). It is on that I
    build, and am secure—for how should I know, of myself, how to serve
    you and be properly yours if it all was to be learnt by my own
    interpreting, and what you professed to dislike you were to be
    considered as wishing for, and what liking, as it seemed, you were
    loathing at your heart, and if so many 'noes' made a 'yes,' and 'one
    refusal no rebuff' and all that horrible bestiality which stout
    gentlemen turn up the whites of their eyes to, when they rise after
    dinner and pressing the right hand to the left side say, 'The toast be
    dear woman!' Now, love, with this feeling in me from the beginning,—I
    do believe,—now, when I am utterly blest in this gift of your love,
    and least able to imagine what I should do without it,—I cannot but
    believe, I say, that had you given me once a 'refusal'—clearly
    derived from your own feelings, and quite apart from any fancied
    consideration for my interests; had this come upon me, whether slowly
    but inevitably in the course of events, or suddenly as precipitated by
    any step of mine; I should, believing you, have never again renewed
    directly or indirectly such solicitation; I should have begun to count
    how many other ways were yet open to serve you and devote myself to
    you ... but from the outside, now, and not in your livery! Now, if I
    should have acted thus under any circumstances, how could I but
    redouble my endeavours at precaution after my own foolish—you know,
    and forgave long since, and I, too, am forgiven in my own eyes, for
    the cause, though not the manner—but could I do other than keep
    'farther from you' than in the letters, dearest? For your own part in
    that matter, seeing it with all the light you have since given me (and
    then, not inadequately by my own light) I could, I do kiss your
    feet, kiss every letter in your name, bless you with my whole heart
    and soul if I could pour them out, from me, before you, to stay and be
    yours; when I think on your motives and pure perfect generosity. It
    was the plainness of that which determined me to wait and be patient
    and grateful and your own for ever in any shape or capacity you might
    please to accept. Do you think that because I am so rich now, I could
    not have been most rich, too, then—in what would seem little only
    to me, only with this great happiness? I should have been proud
    beyond measure—happy past all desert, to call and be allowed to see
    you simply, speak with you and be spoken to—what am I more than
    others? Don't think this mock humility—it is not—you take me in
    your mantle, and we shine together, but I know my part in it! All this
    is written breathlessly on a sudden fancy that you might—if not
    now, at some future time—give other than this, the true reason, for
    that discrepancy you see, that nearness in the letters, that early
    farness in the visits! And, love, all love is but a passionate
    drawing closer—I would be one with you, dearest; let my soul press
    close to you, as my lips, dear life of my life.


    Wednesday.—You are entirely right about those poems of Horne's—I
    spoke only of the effect of the first glance, and it is a principle
    with me to begin by welcoming any strangeness, intention of
    originality in men—the other way of safe copying precedents being
    so safe! So I began by praising all that was at all questionable in
    the form ... reserving the ground-work for after consideration. The
    Elf-story turns out a pure mistake, I think—and a common mistake,
    too. Fairy stories, the good ones, were written for men and women,
    and, being true, pleased also children; now, people set about writing
    for children and miss them and the others too,—with that detestable
    irreverence and plain mocking all the time at the very wonder they
    profess to want to excite. All obvious bending down to the lower
    capacity, determining not to be the great complete man one is, by
    half; any patronizing minute to be spent in the nursery over the books
    and work and healthful play, of a visitor who will presently bid
    good-bye and betake himself to the Beefsteak Club—keep us from all
    that! The Sailor Language is good in its way; but as wrongly used in
    Art as real clay and mud would be, if one plastered them in the
    foreground of a landscape in order to attain to so much truth, at all
    events—the true thing to endeavour is the making a golden colour
    which shall do every good in the power of the dirty brown. Well, then,
    what a veering weathercock am I, to write so and now, so! Not
    altogether,—for first it was but the stranger's welcome I gave, the
    right of every new comer who must stand or fall by his behaviour once
    admitted within the door. And then—when I know what Horne thinks
    of—you, dearest; how he knew you first, and from the soul admired
    you; and how little he thinks of my good fortune ... I could not
    begin by giving you a bad impression of anything he sends—he has such
    very few rewards for a great deal of hard excellent enduring work, and
    none, no reward, I do think, would he less willingly forego than
    your praise and sympathy. But your opinion once expressed—truth
    remains the truth—so, at least, I excuse myself ... and quite as much
    for what I say now as for what was said then! 'King John' is very
    fine and full of purpose; 'The Noble Heart,' sadly faint and
    uncharacteristic. The chief incident, too, turns on that poor
    conventional fallacy about what constitutes a proper wrong to
    resist—a piece of morality, after a different standard, is introduced
    to complete another fashioned morality—a segment of a circle of
    larger dimensions is fitted into a smaller one. Now, you may have your
    own standard of morality in this matter of resistance to wrong, how
    and when if at all. And you may quite understand and sympathize with
    quite different standards innumerable of other people; but go from one
    to the other abruptly, you cannot, I think. 'Bear patiently all
    injuries—revenge in no case'—that is plain. 'Take what you conceive
    to be God's part, do his evident work, stand up for good and destroy
    evil, and co-operate with this whole scheme here'—that is plain,
    too,—but, call Otto's act no wrong, or being one, not such as
    should be avenged—and then, call the remark of a stranger that one is
    a 'recreant'—just what needs the slight punishment of instant death
    to the remarker—and ... where is the way? What is clear?


    —Not my letter! which goes on and on—'dear letters'—sweetest?
    because they cost all the precious labour of making out? Well, I shall
    see you to-morrow, I trust. Bless you, my own—I have not half said
    what was to say even in the letter I thought to write, and which
    proves only what you see! But at a thought I fly off with you, 'at a
    cock-crow from the Grange.'—Ever your own.


    Last night, I received a copy of the New Quarterly—now here is
    popular praise, a sprig of it! Instead of the attack I supposed it to
    be, from my foolish friend's account, the notice is outrageously
    eulogistical, a stupidly extravagant laudation from first to last—and
    in three other articles, as my sister finds by diligent fishing,
    they introduce my name with the same felicitous praise (except one
    instance, though, in a good article by Chorley I am certain); and
    with me I don't know how many poetical crétins are praised as
    noticeably—and, in the turning of a page, somebody is abused in the
    richest style of scavengering—only Carlyle! And I love him enough not
    to envy him nor wish to change places, and giving him mine, mount into
    his.


    All which, let me forget in the thoughts of to-morrow! Bless you, my
    Ba.


