
Wednesday.
[Post-mark, January 7, 1846.]


    But some things are indeed said very truly, and as I like to read
    them—of you, I mean of course,—though I quite understand that it
    is doing no manner of good to go back so to 'Paracelsus,' heading the
    article 'Paracelsus and other poems,' as if the other poems could not
    front the reader broadly by a divine right of their own. 'Paracelsus'
    is a great work and will live, but the way to do you good with the
    stiffnecked public (such good as critics can do in their degree) would
    have been to hold fast and conspicuously the gilded horn of the last
    living crowned creature led by you to the altar, saying 'Look here.'
    What had he to do else, as a critic? Was he writing for the
    Retrospective Review? And then, no attempt at analytical
    criticism—or a failure, at the least attempt! all slack and in
    sentences! Still these are right things to say, true things, worthy
    things, said of you as a poet, though your poems do not find justice:
    and I like, for my own part, the issuing from my cathedral into your
    great world—the outermost temple of divinest consecration. I like
    that figure and association, and none the worse for its being a
    sufficient refutation of what he dared to impute, of your poetical
    sectarianism, in another place—yours!


    For me, it is all quite kind enough—only I object, on my own part
    also, to being reviewed in the 'Seraphim,' when my better books are
    nearer: and also it always makes me a little savage when people talk
    of Tennysonianisms! I have faults enough as the Muses know,—but let
    them be my faults! When I wrote the 'Romaunt of Margret,' I had not
    read a line of Tennyson. I came from the country with my eyes only
    half open, and he had not penetrated where I had been living and
    sleeping: and in fact when I afterwards tried to reach him here in
    London, nothing could be found except one slim volume, so that, till
    the collected works appeared ... favente Moxon, ... I was ignorant
    of his best early productions; and not even for the rhythmetical
    form of my 'Vision of the Poets,' was I indebted to the 'Two
    Voices,'—three pages of my 'Vision' having been written several years
    ago—at the beginning of my illness—and thrown aside, and taken up
    again in the spring of 1844. Ah, well! there's no use talking! In a
    solitary review which noticed my 'Essay on Mind,' somebody wrote ...
    'this young lady imitates Darwin'—and I never could read Darwin,
    ... was stopped always on the second page of the 'Loves of the Plants'
    when I tried to read him to 'justify myself in having an opinion'—the
    repulsion was too strong. Yet the 'young lady imitated Darwin' of
    course, as the infallible critic said so.


    And who are Mr. Helps and Miss Emma Fisher and the 'many others,'
    whose company brings one down to the right plebeianism? The 'three
    poets in three distant ages born' may well stare amazed!


    After all you shall not by any means say that I upset the inkstand on
    your review in a passion—because pray mark that the ink has over-run
    some of your praises, and that if I had been angry to the overthrow of
    an inkstand, it would not have been precisely there. It is the
    second book spoilt by me within these two days—and my fingers were so
    dabbled in blackness yesterday that to wring my hands would only have
    made matters worse. Holding them up to Mr. Kenyon they looked dirty
    enough to befit a poetess—as black 'as bard beseemed'—and he took
    the review away with him to read and save it from more harm.


    How could it be that you did not get my letter which would have
    reached you, I thought, on Monday evening, or on Tuesday at the very
    very earliest?—and how is it that I did not hear from you last night
    again when I was unreasonable enough to expect it? is it true that you
    hate writing to me?


    At that word, comes the review back from dear Mr. Kenyon, and the
    letter which I enclose to show you how it accounts reasonably for the
    ink—I did it 'in a pet,' he thinks! And I ought to buy you a new
    book—certainly I ought—only it is not worth doing justice for—and I
    shall therefore send it back to you spoilt as it is; and you must
    forgive me as magnanimously as you can.


    'Omne ignotum pro magnifico'—do you think so? I hope not indeed!
    vo quietando—and everything else that I ought to do—except of
    course, that thinking of you which is so difficult.


    May God bless you. Till to-morrow!

Your own always.


    Mr. Kenyon refers to 'Festus'—of which I had said that the fine
    things were worth looking for, in the design manqué.


