
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, January 9, 1846.]


    You never think, ever dearest, that I 'repent'—why what a word to
    use! You never could think such a word for a moment! If you were to
    leave me even,—to decide that it is best for you to do it, and do
    it,—I should accede at once of course, but never should I nor could I
    'repent' ... regret anything ... be sorry for having known you and
    loved you ... no! Which I say simply to prove that, in no extreme
    case, could I repent for my own sake. For yours, it might be
    different.


    Not out of 'generosity' certainly, but from the veriest selfishness,
    I choose here, before God, any possible present evil, rather than the
    future consciousness of feeling myself less to you, on the whole, than
    another woman might have been.


    Oh, these vain and most heathenish repetitions—do I not vex you by
    them, you whom I would always please, and never vex? Yet they force
    their way because you are the best noblest and dearest in the world,
    and because your happiness is so precious a thing.

Cloth of frieze, be not too bold,
Though thou'rt matched with cloth of gold!


—that, beloved, was written for me. And you, if you would make me
    happy, always will look at yourself from my ground and by my light,
    as I see you, and consent to be selfish in all things. Observe, that
    if I were vacillating, I should not be so weak as to tease you with
    the process of the vacillation: I should wait till my pendulum ceased
    swinging. It is precisely because I am your own, past any retraction
    or wish of retraction,—because I belong to you by gift and ownership,
    and am ready and willing to prove it before the world at a word of
    yours,—it is precisely for this, that I remind you too often of the
    necessity of using this right of yours, not to your injury, of being
    wise and strong for both of us, and of guarding your happiness which
    is mine. I have said these things ninety and nine times over, and over
    and over have you replied to them,—as yesterday!—and now, do not
    speak any more. It is only my preachment for general use, and not for
    particular application,—only to be ready for application. I love
    you from the deepest of my nature—the whole world is nothing to me
    beside you—and what is so precious, is not far from being terrible.
    'How dreadful is this place.'


    To hear you talk yesterday, is a gladness in the thought for
    to-day,—it was with such a full assent that I listened to every word.
    It is true, I think, that we see things (things apart from ourselves)
    under the same aspect and colour—and it is certainly true that I have
    a sort of instinct by which I seem to know your views of such subjects
    as we have never looked at together. I know you so well (yes, I
    boast to myself of that intimate knowledge), that I seem to know also
    the idola of all things as they are in your eyes—so that never,
    scarcely, I am curious,—never anxious, to learn what your opinions
    may be. Now, have I been curious or anxious? It was enough for me to
    know you.


    More than enough! You have 'left undone'—do you say? On the contrary,
    you have done too much,—you are too much. My cup,—which used to
    hold at the bottom of it just the drop of Heaven dew mingling with the
    absinthus,—has overflowed all this wine: and that makes me look out
    for the vases, which would have held it better, had you stretched out
    your hand for them.


    Say how you are—and do take care and exercise—and write to me,
    dearest!

Ever your own—
Ba.


    How right you are about 'Ben Capstan,'—and the illustration by the
    yellow clay. That is precisely what I meant,—said with more
    precision than I could say it. Art without an ideal is neither nature
    nor art. The question involves the whole difference between Madame
    Tussaud and Phidias.


    I have just received Mr. Edgar Poe's book—and I see that the
    deteriorating preface which was to have saved me from the vanity-fever
    produceable by the dedication, is cut down and away—perhaps in this
    particular copy only!


    Tuesday is so near, as men count, that I caught myself just now being
    afraid lest the week should have no chance of appearing long to you!
    Try to let it be long to you—will you? My consistency is wonderful.


