
Saturday.
[Post-mark, January 10, 1846.]


    Kindest and dearest you are!—that is 'my secret' and for the others,
    I leave them to you!—only it is no secret that I should and must be
    glad to have the words you sent with the book,—which I should have
    seen at all events be sure, whether you had sent it or not. Should I
    not, do you think? And considering what the present generation of
    critics really is, the remarks on you may stand, although it is the
    dreariest impotency to complain of the want of flesh and blood and of
    human sympathy in general. Yet suffer them to say on—it is the stamp
    on the critical knife. There must be something eminently stupid, or
    farewell criticdom! And if anything more utterly untrue could be said
    than another, it is precisely that saying, which Mr. Mackay stands up
    to catch the reversion of! Do you indeed suppose that Heraud could
    have done this? I scarcely can believe it, though some things are said
    rightly as about the 'intellectuality,' and how you stand first by the
    brain,—which is as true as truth can be. Then, I shall have
    'Pauline' in a day or two—yes, I shall and must, and will.


    The 'Ballad Poems and Fancies,' the article calling itself by that
    name, seems indeed to be Mr. Chorley's, and is one of his very best
    papers, I think. There is to me a want of colour and thinness about
    his writings in general, with a grace and savoir faire nevertheless,
    and always a rightness and purity of intention. Observe what he says
    of 'many-sidedness' seeming to trench on opinion and principle. That,
    he means for himself I know, for he has said to me that through having
    such largeness of sympathy he has been charged with want of
    principle—yet 'many-sidedness' is certainly no word for him. The
    effect of general sympathies may be evolved both from an elastic fancy
    and from breadth of mind, and it seems to me that he rather bends to
    a phase of humanity and literature than contains it—than comprehends
    it. Every part of a truth implies the whole; and to accept truth all
    round, does not mean the recognition of contradictory things:
    universal sympathies cannot make a man inconsistent, but, on the
    contrary, sublimely consistent. A church tower may stand between the
    mountains and the sea, looking to either, and stand fast: but the
    willow-tree at the gable-end, blown now toward the north and now
    toward the south while its natural leaning is due east or west, is
    different altogether ... as different as a willow-tree from a church
    tower.


    Ah, what nonsense! There is only one truth for me all this time, while
    I talk about truth and truth. And do you know, when you have told me
    to think of you, I have been feeling ashamed of thinking of you so
    much, of thinking of only you—which is too much, perhaps. Shall I
    tell you? it seems to me, to myself, that no man was ever before to
    any woman what you are to me—the fulness must be in proportion, you
    know, to the vacancy ... and only I know what was behind—the long
    wilderness without the blossoming rose ... and the capacity for
    happiness, like a black gaping hole, before this silver flooding. Is
    it wonderful that I should stand as in a dream, and disbelieve—not
    you—but my own fate? Was ever any one taken suddenly from a
    lampless dungeon and placed upon the pinnacle of a mountain, without
    the head turning round and the heart turning faint, as mine do? And
    you love me more, you say?—Shall I thank you or God?
    Both,—indeed—and there is no possible return from me to either of
    you! I thank you as the unworthy may ... and as we all thank God. How
    shall I ever prove what my heart is to you? How will you ever see it
    as I feel it? I ask myself in vain.


    Have so much faith in me, my only beloved, as to use me simply for
    your own advantage and happiness, and to your own ends without a
    thought of any others—that is all I could ask you with any disquiet
    as to the granting of it—May God bless you!—

Your
Ba.


    But you have the review now—surely?


    The Morning Chronicle attributes the authorship of 'Modern Poets'
    (our article) to Lord John Manners—so I hear this morning. I have
    not yet looked at the paper myself. The Athenæum, still abominably
    dumb!—


