
Sunday.
[Post-mark, January 12, 1846.]


    I have no words for you, my dearest,—I shall never have.


    You are mine, I am yours. Now, here is one sign of what I said ...
    that I must love you more than at first ... a little sign, and to be
    looked narrowly for or it escapes me, but then the increase it shows
    can only be little, so very little now—and as the fine French
    Chemical Analysts bring themselves to appreciate matter in its refined
    stages by millionths, so—! At first I only thought of being happy
    in you,—in your happiness: now I most think of you in the dark hours
    that must come—I shall grow old with you, and die with you—as far as
    I can look into the night I see the light with me. And surely with
    that provision of comfort one should turn with fresh joy and renewed
    sense of security to the sunny middle of the day. I am in the full
    sunshine now; and after, all seems cared for,—is it too homely an
    illustration if I say the day's visit is not crossed by uncertainties
    as to the return through the wild country at nightfall?—Now Keats
    speaks of 'Beauty, that must die—and Joy whose hand is ever at his
    lips, bidding farewell!' And who spoke of—looking up into the eyes
    and asking 'And how long will you love us'?—There is a Beauty that
    will not die, a Joy that bids no farewell, dear dearest eyes that will
    love for ever!


    And I—am to love no longer than I can. Well, dear—and when I can
    no longer—you will not blame me? You will do only as ever, kindly and
    justly; hardly more. I do not pretend to say I have chosen to put my
    fancy to such an experiment, and consider how that is to happen, and
    what measures ought to be taken in the emergency—because in the
    'universality of my sympathies' I certainly number a very lively one
    with my own heart and soul, and cannot amuse myself by such a
    spectacle as their supposed extinction or paralysis. There is no doubt
    I should be an object for the deepest commiseration of you or any more
    fortunate human being. And I hope that because such a calamity does
    not obtrude itself on me as a thing to be prayed against, it is no
    less duly implied with all the other visitations from which no
    humanity can be altogether exempt—just as God bids us ask for the
    continuance of the 'daily bread'!—'battle, murder and sudden death'
    lie behind doubtless. I repeat, and perhaps in so doing only give one
    more example of the instantaneous conversion of that indignation we
    bestow in another's case, into wonderful lenity when it becomes our
    own, ... that I only contemplate the possibility you make me
    recognize, with pity, and fear ... no anger at all; and imprecations
    of vengeance, for what? Observe, I only speak of cases possible;
    of sudden impotency of mind; that is possible—there are other
    ways of 'changing,' 'ceasing to love' &c. which it is safest not to
    think of nor believe in. A man may never leave his writing desk
    without seeing safe in one corner of it the folded slip which directs
    the disposal of his papers in the event of his reason suddenly leaving
    him—or he may never go out into the street without a card in his
    pocket to signify his address to those who may have to pick him up in
    an apoplectic fit—but if he once begins to fear he is growing a glass
    bottle, and, so, liable to be smashed,—do you see? And now, love,
    dear heart of my heart, my own, only Ba—see no more—see what I am,
    what God in his constant mercy ordinarily grants to those who have, as
    I, received already so much; much, past expression! It is but—if you
    will so please—at worst, forestalling the one or two years, for my
    sake; but you will be as sure of me one day as I can be now of
    myself—and why not now be sure? See, love—a year is gone by—we
    were in one relation when you wrote at the end of a letter 'Do not say
    I do not tire you' (by writing)—'I am sure I do.' A year has gone
    by—Did you tire me then? Now, you tell me what is told; for my
    sake, sweet, let the few years go by; we are married, and my arms are
    round you, and my face touches yours, and I am asking you, 'Were you
    not to me, in that dim beginning of 1846, a joy behind all joys, a
    life added to and transforming mine, the good I choose from all the
    possible gifts of God on this earth, for which I seemed to have lived;
    which accepting, I thankfully step aside and let the rest get what
    they can; what, it is very likely, they esteem more—for why should my
    eye be evil because God's is good; why should I grudge that, giving
    them, I do believe, infinitely less, he gives them a content in the
    inferior good and belief in its worth? I should have wished that
    further concession, that illusion as I believe it, for their
    sakes—but I cannot undervalue my own treasure and so scant the only
    tribute of mere gratitude which is in my power to pay. Hear this said
    now before the few years; and believe in it now for then, dearest!


    Must you see 'Pauline'? At least then let me wait a few days; to
    correct the misprints which affect the sense, and to write you the
    history of it; what is necessary you should know before you see it.
    That article I suppose to be by Heraud—about two thirds—and the
    rest, or a little less, by that Mr. Powell—whose unimaginable,
    impudent vulgar stupidity you get some inkling of in the 'Story from
    Boccaccio'—of which the words quoted were his, I am sure—as sure
    as that he knows not whether Boccaccio lived before or after
    Shakspeare, whether Florence or Rome be the more northern city,—one
    word of Italian in general, or letter of Boccaccio's in particular.
    When I took pity on him once on a time and helped his verses into a
    sort of grammar and sense, I did not think he was a buyer of other
    men's verses, to be printed as his own; thus he bought two
    modernisations of Chaucer—'Ugolino' and another story from Leigh
    Hunt—and one, 'Sir Thopas' from Horne, and printed them as his own,
    as I learned only last week. He paid me extravagant court and, seeing
    no harm in the mere folly of the man, I was on good terms with him,
    till ten months ago he grossly insulted a friend of mine who had
    written an article for the Review—(which is as good as his, he
    being a large proprietor of the delectable property, and influencing
    the voices of his co-mates in council)—well, he insulted my friend,
    who had written that article at my special solicitation, and did all
    he could to avoid paying the price of it—Why?—Because the poor
    creature had actually taken the article to the Editor as one by his
    friend Serjeant Talfourd contributed for pure love of him, Powell the
    aforesaid,—cutting, in consequence, no inglorious figure in the eyes
    of Printer and Publisher! Now I was away all this time in Italy or he
    would never have ventured on such a piece of childish impertinence.
    And my friend being a true gentleman, and quite unused to this sort of
    'practice,' in the American sense, held his peace and went without his
    'honorarium.' But on my return, I enquired, and made him make a
    proper application, which Mr. Powell treated with all the insolence in
    the world—because, as the event showed, the having to write a cheque
    for 'the Author of the Article'—that author's name not being
    Talfourd's ... there was certain disgrace! Since then (ten months
    ago) I have never seen him—and he accuses himself, observe, of
    'sucking my plots while I drink his tea'—one as much as the other!
    And now why do I tell you this, all of it? Ah,—now you shall hear!
    Because, it has often been in my mind to ask you what you know of
    this Mr. Powell, or ever knew. For he, (being profoundly versed in
    every sort of untruth, as every fresh experience shows me, and the
    rest of his acquaintance) he told me long ago, 'he used to correspond
    with you, and that he quarrelled with you'—which I supposed to mean
    that he began by sending you his books (as with one and everybody) and
    that, in return to your note of acknowledgment, he had chosen to write
    again, and perhaps, again—is it so? Do not write one word in answer
    to me—the name of such a miserable nullity, and husk of a man, ought
    not to have a place in your letters—and that way he would get near
    to me again; near indeed this time!—So tell me, in a word—or do
    not tell me.


    How I never say what I sit down to say! How saying the little makes me
    want to say the more! How the least of little things, once taken up as
    a thing to be imparted to you, seems to need explanations and
    commentaries; all is of importance to me—every breath you breathe,
    every little fact (like this) you are to know!


    I was out last night—to see the rest of Frank Talfourd's theatricals;
    and met Dickens and his set—so my evenings go away! If I do not bring
    the Act you must forgive me—yet I shall, I think; the roughness
    matters little in this stage. Chorley says very truly that a tragedy
    implies as much power kept back as brought out—very true that is. I
    do not, on the whole, feel dissatisfied—as was to be but
    expected—with the effect of this last—the shelve of the hill,
    whence the end is seen, you continuing to go down to it, so that at
    the very last you may pass off into a plain and so away—not come to a
    stop like your horse against a church wall. It is all in long
    speeches—the action, proper, is in them—they are no descriptions,
    or amplifications—but here, in a drama of this kind, all the
    events, (and interest), take place in the minds of the actors ...
    somewhat like 'Paracelsus' in that respect. You know, or don't know,
    that the general charge against me, of late, from the few quarters I
    thought it worth while to listen to, has been that of abrupt,
    spasmodic writing—they will find some fault with this, of course.


    How you know Chorley! That is precisely the man, that willow blowing
    now here now there—precisely! I wish he minded the Athenæum, its
    silence or eloquence, no more nor less than I—but he goes on
    painfully plying me with invitation after invitation, only to show me,
    I feel confident, that he has no part nor lot in the matter: I have
    two kind little notes asking me to go on Thursday and Saturday. See
    the absurd position of us both; he asks more of my presence than he
    can want, just to show his own kind feeling, of which I do not doubt;
    and I must try and accept more hospitality than suits me, only to
    prove my belief in that same! For myself—if I have vanity which such
    Journals can raise; would the praise of them raise it, they who
    praised Mr. Mackay's own, own 'Dead Pan,' quite his own, the other
    day?—By the way, Miss Cushman informed me the other evening that the
    gentleman had written a certain 'Song of the Bell' ... 'singularly
    like Schiller's; considering that Mr. M. had never seen it!' I am
    told he writes for the Athenæum, but don't know. Would that sort of
    praise be flattering, or his holding the tongue—which Forster, deep
    in the mysteries of the craft, corroborated my own notion about—as
    pure willingness to hurt, and confessed impotence and little clever
    spite, and enforced sense of what may be safe at the last? You shall
    see they will not notice—unless a fresh publication alters the
    circumstances—until some seven or eight months—as before; and then
    they will notice, and praise, and tell anybody who cares to
    enquire, 'So we noticed the work.' So do not you go expecting
    justice or injustice till I tell you. It answers me to be found
    writing so, so anxious to prove I understand the laws of the game,
    when that game is only 'Thimble-rig' and for prizes of
    gingerbread-nuts—Prize or no prize, Mr. Dilke does shift the pea,
    and so did from the beginning—as Charles Lamb's pleasant sobriquet
    (Mr. Bilk, he would have it) testifies. Still he behaved kindly to
    that poor Frances Brown—let us forget him.


    And now, my Audience, my crown-bearer, my path-preparer—I am with you
    again and out of them all—there, here, in my arms, is my proved
    palpable success! My life, my poetry, gained nothing, oh no!—but
    this found them, and blessed them. On Tuesday I shall see you,
    dearest—am much better; well to-day—are you well—or 'scarcely to be
    called an invalid'? Oh, when I have you, am by you—


    Bless you, dearest—And be very sure you have your wish about the
    length of the week—still Tuesday must come! And with it your own,
    happy, grateful

R.B.


