
Tuesday Night.
[Post-mark, January 14, 1846.]


    Ah Mr. Kenyon!—how he vexed me to-day. To keep away all the ten days
    before, and to come just at the wrong time after all! It was better
    for you, I suppose—believe—to go with him down-stairs—yes, it
    certainly was better: it was disagreeable enough to be very wise! Yet
    I, being addicted to every sort of superstition turning to melancholy,
    did hate so breaking off in the middle of that black thread ... (do
    you remember what we were talking of when they opened the door?) that
    I was on the point of saying 'Stay one moment,' which I should have
    repented afterwards for the best of good reasons. Oh, I should have
    liked to have 'fastened off' that black thread, and taken one stitch
    with a blue or a green one!


    You do not remember what we were talking of? what you, rather, were
    talking of? And what I remember, at least, because it is exactly the
    most unkind and hard thing you ever said to me—ever dearest, so I
    remember it by that sign! That you should say such a thing to me—!
    think what it was, for indeed I will not write it down here—it would
    be worse than Mr. Powell! Only the foolishness of it (I mean, the
    foolishness of it alone) saves it, smooths it to a degree!—the
    foolishness being the same as if you asked a man where he would walk
    when he lost his head. Why, if you had asked St. Denis beforehand,
    he would have thought it a foolish question.


    And you!—you, who talk so finely of never, never doubting; of being
    such an example in the way of believing and trusting—it appears,
    after all, that you have an imagination apprehensive (or
    comprehensive) of 'glass bottles' like other sublunary creatures, and
    worse than some of them. For mark, that I never went any farther than
    to the stone-wall hypothesis of your forgetting me!—I always
    stopped there—and never climbed, to the top of it over the
    broken-bottle fortification, to see which way you meant to walk
    afterwards. And you, to ask me so coolly—think what you asked me.
    That you should have the heart to ask such a question!


    And the reason—! and it could seem a reasonable matter of doubt to
    you whether I would go to the south for my health's sake!—And I
    answered quite a common 'no' I believe—for you bewildered me for the
    moment—and I have had tears in my eyes two or three times since, just
    through thinking back of it all ... of your asking me such questions.
    Now did I not tell you when I first knew you, that I was leaning out
    of the window? True, that was—I was tired of living ...
    unaffectedly tired. All I cared to live for was to do better some of
    the work which, after all, was out of myself, and which I had to reach
    across to do. But I told you. Then, last year, for duty's sake I would
    have consented to go to Italy! but if you really fancy that I would
    have struggled in the face of all that difficulty—or struggled,
    indeed, anywise, to compass such an object as that—except for the
    motive of your caring for it and me—why you know nothing of me after
    all—nothing! And now, take away the motive, and I am where I
    was—leaning out of the window again. To put it in plainer words (as
    you really require information), I should let them do what they liked
    to me till I was dead—only I wouldn't go to Italy—if anybody
    proposed Italy out of contradiction. In the meantime I do entreat you
    never to talk of such a thing to me any more.


    You know, if you were to leave me by your choice and for your
    happiness, it would be another thing. It would be very lawful to talk
    of that.


    And observe! I perfectly understand that you did not think of
    doubting me—so to speak! But you thought, all the same, that if
    such a thing happened, I should be capable of doing so and so.


    Well—I am not quarrelling—I am uneasy about your head rather. That
    pain in it—what can it mean? I do beseech you to think of me just so
    much as will lead you to take regular exercise every day, never
    missing a day; since to walk till you are tired on Tuesday and then
    not to walk at all until Friday is not taking exercise, nor the
    thing required. Ah, if you knew how dreadfully natural every sort of
    evil seems to my mind, you would not laugh at me for being afraid. I
    do beseech you, dearest! And then, Sir John Hanmer invited you,
    besides Mr. Warburton, and suppose you went to him for a very little
    time—just for the change of air? or if you went to the coast
    somewhere. Will you consider, and do what is right, for me? I do not
    propose that you should go to Italy, observe, nor any great thing at
    which you might reasonably hesitate. And—did you ever try smoking as
    a remedy? If the nerves of the head chiefly are affected it might do
    you good, I have been thinking. Or without the smoking, to breathe
    where tobacco is burnt,—that calms the nervous system in a
    wonderful manner, as I experienced once myself when, recovering from
    an illness, I could not sleep, and tried in vain all sorts of
    narcotics and forms of hop-pillow and inhalation, yet was
    tranquillized in one half hour by a pinch of tobacco being burnt
    in a shovel near me. Should you mind it very much? the trying I mean?


    Wednesday.—For 'Pauline'—when I had named it to you I was on the
    point of sending for the book to the booksellers—then suddenly I
    thought to myself that I should wait and hear whether you very, very
    much would dislike my reading it. See now! Many readers have done
    virtuously, but I, (in this virtue I tell you of) surpassed them
    all!—And now, because I may, I 'must read it':—and as there are
    misprints to be corrected, will you do what is necessary, or what you
    think is necessary, and bring me the book on Monday? Do not
    send—bring it. In the meanwhile I send back the review which I forgot
    to give to you yesterday in the confusion. Perhaps you have not read
    it in your house, and in any case there is no use in my keeping it.


    Shall I hear from you, I wonder! Oh my vain thoughts, that will not
    keep you well! And, ever since you have known me, you have been
    worse—that, you confess!—and what if it should be the crossing of
    my bad star? You of the 'Crown' and the 'Lyre,' to seek influences
    from the 'chair of Cassiopeia'! I hope she will forgive me for using
    her name so! I might as well have compared her to a professorship of
    poetry in the university of Oxford, according to the latest election.
    You know, the qualification, there, is,—not to be a poet.


    How vexatious, yesterday! The stars (talking of them) were out of
    spherical tune, through the damp weather, perhaps, and that scarlet
    sun was a sign! First Mr. Chorley!—and last, dear Mr. Kenyon; who
    will say tiresome things without any provocation. Did you walk with
    him his way, or did he walk with you yours? or did you only walk
    down-stairs together?


    Write to me! Remember that it is a month to Monday. Think of your very
    own, who bids God bless you when she prays best for herself!—

E.B.B.


    Say particularly how you are—now do not omit it. And will you have
    Miss Martineau's books when I can lend them to you? Just at this
    moment I dare not, because they are reading them here.


    Let Mr. Mackay have his full proprietary in his 'Dead Pan'—which is
    quite a different conception of the subject, and executed in blank
    verse too. I have no claims against him, I am sure!


    But for the man!—To call him a poet! A prince and potentate of
    Commonplaces, such as he is!—I have seen his name in the Athenæum
    attached to a lyric or two ... poems, correctly called fugitive,—more
    than usually fugitive—but I never heard before that his hand was in
    the prose department.


