
Thursday.
[Post-mark, January 15, 1846.]


    Dearest, dearer to my heart minute by minute, I had no wish to give
    you pain, God knows. No one can more readily consent to let a few
    years more or less of life go out of account,—be lost—but as I sate
    by you, you so full of the truest life, for this world as for the
    next,—and was struck by the possibility, all that might happen were I
    away, in the case of your continuing to acquiesce—dearest, it is
    horrible—could not but speak. If in drawing you, all of you, closer
    to my heart, I hurt you whom I would—outlive ... yes,—cannot speak
    here—forgive me, Ba.


    My Ba, you are to consider now for me. Your health, your strength, it
    is all wonderful; that is not my dream, you know—but what all see.
    Now, steadily care for us both—take time, take counsel if you choose;
    but at the end tell me what you will do for your part—thinking of me
    as utterly devoted, soul and body, to you, living wholly in your life,
    seeing good and ill only as you see,—being yours as your hand is,—or
    as your Flush, rather. Then I will, on my side, prepare. When I say
    'take counsel'—I reserve my last right, the man's right of first
    speech. I stipulate, too, and require to say my own speech in my own
    words or by letter—remember! But this living without you is too
    tormenting now. So begin thinking,—as for Spring, as for a New Year,
    as for a new life.


    I went no farther than the door with Mr. Kenyon. He must see the
    truth; and—you heard the playful words which had a meaning all the
    same.


    No more of this; only, think of it for me, love!


    One of these days I shall write a long letter—on the omitted matters,
    unanswered questions, in your past letters. The present joy still
    makes me ungrateful to the previous one; but I remember. We are to
    live together one day, love!


    Will you let Mr. Poe's book lie on the table on Monday, if you please,
    that I may read what he does say, with my own eyes? That I meant
    to ask, too!


    How too, too kind you are—how you care for so little that affects me!
    I am very much better—I went out yesterday, as you found: to-day I
    shall walk, beside seeing Chorley. And certainly, certainly I would go
    away for a week, if so I might escape being ill (and away from you) a
    fortnight; but I am not ill—and will care, as you bid me, beloved!
    So, you will send, and take all trouble; and all about that crazy
    Review! Now, you should not!—I will consider about your goodness. I
    hardly know if I care to read that kind of book just now.


    Will you, and must you have 'Pauline'? If I could pray you to revoke
    that decision! For it is altogether foolish and not boylike—and I
    shall, I confess, hate the notion of running over it—yet commented
    it must be; more than mere correction! I was unluckily
    precocious—but I had rather you saw real infantine efforts
    (verses at six years old, and drawings still earlier) than this
    ambiguous, feverish—Why not wait? When you speak of the
    'Bookseller'—I smile, in glorious security—having a whole bale of
    sheets at the house-top. He never knew my name even!—and I withdrew
    these after a very little time.


    And now—here is a vexation. May I be with you (for this once) next
    Monday, at two instead of three o'clock? Forster's business with
    the new Paper obliges him, he says, to restrict his choice of days to
    Monday next—and give up my part of Monday I will never for fifty
    Forsters—now, sweet, mind that! Monday is no common day, but leads to
    a Saturday—and if, as I ask, I get leave to call at 2—and to stay
    till 3-1/2—though I then lose nearly half an hour—yet all will be
    comparatively well. If there is any difficulty—one word and I
    re-appoint our party, his and mine, for the day the paper breaks
    down—not so long to wait, it strikes me!


    Now, bless you, my precious Ba—I am your own—

—Your own R.


