
Thursday Night.
[In the same envelope with the preceding letter.]


    Ever dearest—how you can write touching things to me; and how my
    whole being vibrates, as a string, to these! How have I deserved from
    God and you all that I thank you for? Too unworthy I am of all! Only,
    it was not, dearest beloved, what you feared, that was 'horrible,' it
    was what you supposed, rather! It was a mistake of yours. And now we
    will not talk of it any more.


    Friday morning.—For the rest, I will think as you desire: but I
    have thought a great deal, and there are certainties which I know; and
    I hope we both are aware that nothing can be more hopeless than our
    position in some relations and aspects, though you do not guess
    perhaps that the very approach to the subject is shut up by dangers,
    and that from the moment of a suspicion entering one mind, we should
    be able to meet never again in this room, nor to have intercourse by
    letter through the ordinary channel. I mean, that letters of yours,
    addressed to me here, would infallibly be stopped and destroyed—if
    not opened. Therefore it is advisable to hurry on nothing—on these
    grounds it is advisable. What should I do if I did not see you nor
    hear from you, without being able to feel that it was for your
    happiness? What should I do for a month even? And then, I might be
    thrown out of the window or its equivalent—I look back shuddering to
    the dreadful scenes in which poor Henrietta was involved who never
    offended as I have offended ... years ago which seem as present as
    to-day. She had forbidden the subject to be referred to until that
    consent was obtained—and at a word she gave up all—at a word. In
    fact she had no true attachment, as I observed to Arabel at the
    time—a child never submitted more meekly to a revoked holiday. Yet
    how she was made to suffer. Oh, the dreadful scenes! and only because
    she had seemed to feel a little. I told you, I think, that there was
    an obliquity—an eccentricity, or something beyond—on one class of
    subjects. I hear how her knees were made to ring upon the floor, now!
    she was carried out of the room in strong hysterics, and I, who rose
    up to follow her, though I was quite well at that time and suffered
    only by sympathy, fell flat down upon my face in a fainting-fit.
    Arabel thought I was dead.


    I have tried to forget it all—but now I must remember—and throughout
    our intercourse I have remembered. It is necessary to remember so
    much as to avoid such evils as are inevitable, and for this reason I
    would conceal nothing from you. Do you remember, besides, that there
    can be no faltering on my 'part,' and that, if I should remain well,
    which is not proved yet, I will do for you what you please and as you
    please to have it done. But there is time for considering!


    Only ... as you speak of 'counsel,' I will take courage to tell you
    that my sisters know, Arabel is in most of my confidences, and being
    often in the room with me, taxed me with the truth long ago—she saw
    that I was affected from some cause—and I told her. We are as safe
    with both of them as possible ... and they thoroughly understand that
    if there should be any change it would not be your fault.... I made
    them understand that thoroughly. From themselves I have received
    nothing but the most smiling words of kindness and satisfaction (I
    thought I might tell you so much), they have too much tenderness for
    me to fail in it now. My brothers, it is quite necessary not to draw
    into a dangerous responsibility. I have felt that from the beginning,
    and shall continue to feel it—though I hear and can observe that they
    are full of suspicions and conjectures, which are never unkindly
    expressed. I told you once that we held hands the faster in this house
    for the weight over our heads. But the absolute knowledge would be
    dangerous for my brothers: with my sisters it is different, and I
    could not continue to conceal from them what they had under their
    eyes; and then, Henrietta is in a like position. It was not wrong of
    me to let them know it?—no?


    Yet of what consequence is all this to the other side of the question?
    What, if you should give pain and disappointment where you owe such
    pure gratitude. But we need not talk of these things now. Only you
    have more to consider than I, I imagine, while the future comes on.


    Dearest, let me have my way in one thing: let me see you on Tuesday
    instead of on Monday—on Tuesday at the old hour. Be reasonable and
    consider. Tuesday is almost as near as the day before it; and on
    Monday, I shall be hurried at first, lest Papa should be still in the
    house, (no harm, but an excuse for nervousness: and I can't quote a
    noble Roman as you can, to the praise of my conscience!) and you
    will be hurried at last, lest you should not be in time for Mr.
    Forster. On the other hand, I will not let you be rude to the Daily
    News, ... no, nor to the Examiner. Come on Tuesday, then, instead
    of Monday, and let us have the usual hours in a peaceable way,—and if
    there is no obstacle,—that is, if Mr. Kenyon or some equivalent
    authority should not take note of your being here on Tuesday, why you
    can come again on the Saturday afterwards—I do not see the
    difficulty. Are we agreed? On Tuesday, at three o'clock. Consider,
    besides, that the Monday arrangement would hurry you in every manner,
    and leave you fagged for the evening—no, I will not hear of it. Not
    on my account, not on yours!


    Think of me on Monday instead, and write before. Are not these two
    lawful letters? And do not they deserve an answer?


    My life was ended when I knew you, and if I survive myself it is for
    your sake:—that resumes all my feelings and intentions in respect
    to you. No 'counsel' could make the difference of a grain of dust in
    the balance. It is so, and not otherwise. If you changed towards me,
    it would be better for you I believe—and I should be only where I was
    before. While you do not change, I look to you for my first
    affections and my first duty—and nothing but your bidding me, could
    make me look away.


    In the midst of this, Mr. Kenyon came and I felt as if I could not
    talk to him. No—he does not 'see how it is.' He may have passing
    thoughts sometimes, but they do not stay long enough to produce—even
    an opinion. He asked if you had been here long.


    It may be wrong and ungrateful, but I do wish sometimes that the world
    were away—even the good Kenyon-aspect of the world.


    And so, once more—may God bless you!

I am wholly yours—


    Tuesday, remember! And say that you agree.


