
Saturday.
[Post-mark, January 17, 1846.]


    Did my own Ba, in the prosecution of her studies, get to a book on the
    forb—no, unforbidden shelf—wherein Voltaire pleases to say that
    'si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer'? I feel, after
    reading these letters,—as ordinarily after seeing you, sweetest, or
    hearing from you,—that if marriage did not exist, I should
    infallibly invent it. I should say, no words, no feelings even,
    do justice to the whole conviction and religion of my soul—and
    though they may be suffered to represent some one minute's phase of
    it, yet, in their very fulness and passion they do injustice to the
    unrepresented, other minute's, depth and breadth of love ... which
    let my whole life (I would say) be devoted to telling and proving and
    exemplifying, if not in one, then in another way—let me have the
    plain palpable power of this; the assured time for this ... something
    of the satisfaction ... (but for the fantasticalness of the
    illustration) ... something like the earnestness of some suitor in
    Chancery if he could once get Lord Lyndhurst into a room with him, and
    lock the door on them both, and know that his whole story must be
    listened to now, and the 'rights of it,'—dearest, the love unspoken
    now you are to hear 'in all time of our tribulation, in all time of
    our wealth ... at the hour of death, and'—


    If I did not know this was so,—nothing would have been said, or
    sought for. Your friendship, the perfect pride in it, the wish for,
    and eager co-operation in, your welfare, all that is different, and,
    seen now, nothing.


    I will care for it no more, dearest—I am wedded to you now. I believe
    no human being could love you more—that thought consoles me for my
    own imperfection—for when that does strike me, as so often it will,
    I turn round on my pursuing self, and ask 'What if it were a claim
    then, what is in Her, demanded rationally, equitably, in return for
    what were in you—do you like that way!'—And I do not, Ba—you,
    even, might not—when people everyday buy improveable ground, and
    eligible sites for building, and don't want every inch filled up,
    covered over, done to their hands! So take me, and make me what you
    can and will—and though never to be more yours, yet more like
    you, I may and must be—Yes, indeed—best, only love!


    And am I not grateful to your sisters—entirely grateful for that
    crowning comfort; it is 'miraculous,' too, if you please—for you
    shall know me by finger-tip intelligence or any art magic of old or
    new times—but they do not see me, know me—and must moreover be
    jealous of you, chary of you, as the daughters of Hesperus, of
    wonderers and wistful lookers up at the gold apple—yet instead of
    'rapidly levelling eager eyes'—they are indulgent? Then—shall I wish
    capriciously they were not your sisters, not so near you, that there
    might be a kind of grace in loving them for it'—but what grace can
    there be when ... yes, I will tell you—no, I will not—it is
    foolish!—and it is not foolish in me to love the table and chairs
    and vases in your room.


    Let me finish writing to-morrow; it would not become me to utter a
    word against the arrangement—and Saturday promised, too—but though
    all concludes against the early hour on Monday, yet—but this is
    wrong—on Tuesday it shall be, then,—thank you, dearest! you let me
    keep up the old proper form, do you not?—I shall continue to thank,
    and be gratified &c. as if I had some untouched fund of thanks at my
    disposal to cut a generous figure with on occasion! And so, now, for
    your kind considerateness thank you ... that I say, which, God
    knows, could not say, if I died ten deaths in one to do you good,
    'you are repaid'—


    To-morrow I will write, and answer more. I am pretty well, and will go
    out to-day—to-night. My Act is done, and copied—I will bring it. Do
    you see the Athenæum? By Chorley surely—and kind and satisfactory.
    I did not expect any notice for a long time—all that about the
    'mist,' 'unchanged manner' and the like is politic concession to the
    Powers that Be ... because he might tell me that and much more with
    his own lips or unprofessional pen, and be thanked into the bargain,
    yet he does not. But I fancy he saves me from a rougher hand—the long
    extracts answer every purpose—


    There is all to say yet—to-morrow!


    And ever, ever your own; God bless you!

R.


    Admire the clean paper.... I did not notice that I have been writing in
    a desk where a candle fell! See the bottoms of the other pages!


