
Sunday Evening.
[Post-mark, January 19, 1846.]


    You may have seen, I put off all the weighty business part of the
    letter—but I shall do very little with it now. To be sure, a few
    words will serve, because you understand me, and believe in enough
    of me. First, then, I am wholly satisfied, thoroughly made happy in
    your assurance. I would build up an infinity of lives, if I could plan
    them, one on the other, and all resting on you, on your word—I fully
    believe in it,—of my feeling, the gratitude, let there be no attempt
    to speak. And for 'waiting'; 'not hurrying',—I leave all with you
    henceforth—all you say is most wise, most convincing.


    On the saddest part of all,—silence. You understand, and I can
    understand through you. Do you know, that I never used to dream
    unless indisposed, and rarely then—(of late I dream of you, but quite
    of late)—and those nightmare dreams have invariably been of one
    sort. I stand by (powerless to interpose by a word even) and see the
    infliction of tyranny on the unresisting man or beast (generally the
    last)—and I wake just in time not to die: let no one try this kind of
    experiment on me or mine! Though I have observed that by a felicitous
    arrangement, the man with the whip puts it into use with an old horse
    commonly. I once knew a fine specimen of the boilingly passionate,
    desperately respectable on the Eastern principle that reverences a
    madman—and this fellow, whom it was to be death to oppose, (some
    bloodvessel was to break)—he, once at a dinner party at which I was
    present, insulted his wife (a young pretty simple believer in his
    awful immunities from the ordinary terms that keep men in
    order)—brought the tears into her eyes and sent her from the room ...
    purely to 'show off' in the eyes of his guests ... (all males,
    law-friends &c., he being a lawyer.) This feat accomplished, he, too,
    left us with an affectation of compensating relentment, to 'just say a
    word and return'—and no sooner was his back to the door than the
    biggest, stupidest of the company began to remark 'what a fortunate
    thing it was that Mr. So-and-so had such a submissive wife—not one of
    the women who would resist—that is, attempt to resist—and so
    exasperate our gentleman into ... Heaven only knew what!' I said it
    was, in one sense, a fortunate thing; because one of these women,
    without necessarily being the lion-tressed Bellona, would richly give
    him his desert, I thought—'Oh, indeed?' No—this man was not to be
    opposed—wait, you might, till the fit was over, and then try what
    kind argument would do—and so forth to unspeakable nausea. Presently
    we went up-stairs—there sate the wife with dried eyes, and a smile at
    the tea-table—and by her, in all the pride of conquest, with her hand
    in his, our friend—disposed to be very good-natured of course. I
    listened arrectis auribus, and in a minute he said he did not know
    somebody I mentioned. I told him, that I easily conceived—such a
    person would never condescend to know him, &c., and treated him to
    every consequence ingenuity could draw from that text—and at the end
    marched out of the room; and the valorous man, who had sate like a
    post, got up, took a candle, followed me to the door, and only said in
    unfeigned wonder, 'What can have possessed you, my dear B?'—All
    which I as much expected beforehand, as that the above mentioned man
    of the whip keeps quiet in the presence of an ordinary-couraged dog.
    All this is quite irrelevant to the case—indeed, I write to get rid
    of the thought altogether. But I do hold it the most stringent duty of
    all who can, to stop a condition, a relation of one human being to
    another which God never allowed to exist between Him and ourselves.
    Trees live and die, if you please, and accept will for a law—but
    with us, all commands surely refer to a previously-implanted
    conviction in ourselves of their rationality and justice. Or why
    declare that 'the Lord is holy, just and good' unless there is
    recognised and independent conception of holiness and goodness, to
    which the subsequent assertion is referable? 'You know what holiness
    is, what it is to be good? Then, He is that'—not, 'that is
    so—because he is that'; though, of course, when once the converse
    is demonstrated, this, too, follows, and may be urged for practical
    purposes. All God's urgency, so to speak, is on the justice of his
    judgments, rightness of his rule: yet why? one might ask—if one
    does believe that the rule is his; why ask further?—Because, his is
    a 'reasonable service,' once for all.


    Understand why I turn my thoughts in this direction. If it is indeed
    as you fear, and no endeavour, concession, on my part will avail,
    under any circumstances—(and by endeavour, I mean all heart and soul
    could bring the flesh to perform)—in that case, you will not come to
    me with a shadow past hope of chasing.


    The likelihood is, I over frighten myself for you, by the involuntary
    contrast with those here—you allude to them—if I went with this
    letter downstairs and said simply 'I want this taken to the direction
    to-night, and am unwell and unable to go, will you take it now?' my
    father would not say a word, or rather would say a dozen cheerful
    absurdities about his 'wanting a walk,' 'just having been wishing to
    go out' &c. At night he sits studying my works—illustrating them (I
    will bring you drawings to make you laugh)—and yesterday I picked
    up a crumpled bit of paper ... 'his notion of what a criticism on this
    last number ought to be,—none, that have appeared, satisfying
    him!'—So judge of what he will say! And my mother loves me just as
    much more as must of necessity be.


    Once more, understand all this ... for the clock scares me of a
    sudden—I meant to say more—far more.


    But may God bless you ever—my own dearest, my Ba—

I am wholly your R.


    (Tuesday)


