
Sunday.
[Post-mark, January 19, 1846.]


    Your letter came just after the hope of one had past—the latest
    Saturday post had gone, they said, and I was beginning to be as vexed
    as possible, looking into the long letterless Sunday. Then, suddenly
    came the knock—the postman redivivus—just when it seemed so beyond
    hoping for—it was half past eight, observe, and there had been a post
    at nearly eight—suddenly came the knock, and your letter with it. Was
    I not glad, do you think?


    And you call the Athenæum 'kind and satisfactory'? Well—I was angry
    instead. To make us wait so long for an 'article' like that, was not
    over-kind certainly, nor was it 'satisfactory' to class your peculiar
    qualities with other contemporary ones, as if they were not peculiar.
    It seemed to me cold and cautious, from the causes perhaps which you
    mention, but the extracts will work their own way with everybody who
    knows what poetry is, and for others, let the critic do his worst with
    them. For what is said of 'mist' I have no patience because I who know
    when you are obscure and never think of denying it in some of your
    former works, do hold that this last number is as clear and
    self-sufficing to a common understanding, as far as the expression and
    medium goes, as any book in the world, and that Mr. Chorley was bound
    in verity to say so. If I except that one stanza, you know, it is to
    make the general observation stronger. And then 'mist' is an infamous
    word for your kind of obscurity. You never are misty, not even in
    'Sordello'—never vague. Your graver cuts deep sharp lines,
    always—and there is an extra-distinctness in your images and
    thoughts, from the midst of which, crossing each other infinitely, the
    general significance seems to escape. So that to talk of a 'mist,'
    when you are obscurest, is an impotent thing to do. Indeed it makes me
    angry.


    But the suggested virtue of 'self-renunciation' only made me smile,
    because it is simply nonsense ... nonsense which proves itself to be
    nonsense at a glance. So genius is to renounce itself—that is the
    new critical doctrine, is it? Now is it not foolish? To recognize the
    poetical faculty of a man, and then to instruct him in
    'self-renunciation' in that very relation—or rather, to hint the
    virtue of it, and hesitate the dislike of his doing otherwise? What
    atheists these critics are after all—and how the old heathens
    understood the divinity of gifts better, beyond any comparison. We may
    take shame to ourselves, looking back.


    Now, shall I tell you what I did yesterday? It was so warm, so warm,
    the thermometer at 68 in this room, that I took it into my head to
    call it April instead of January, and put on a cloak and walked
    down-stairs into the drawing-room—walked, mind! Before, I was carried
    by one of my brothers,—even to the last autumn-day when I went out—I
    never walked a step for fear of the cold in the passages. But
    yesterday it was so wonderfully warm, and I so strong besides—it was
    a feat worthy of the day—and I surprised them all as much as if I had
    walked out of the window instead. That kind dear Stormie, who with all
    his shyness and awkwardness has the most loving of hearts in him, said
    that he was 'so glad to see me'!


    Well!—setting aside the glory of it, it would have been as wise
    perhaps if I had abstained; our damp detestable climate reaches us
    otherwise than by cold, and I am not quite as well as usual this
    morning after an uncomfortable feverish night—not very unwell, mind,
    nor unwell at all in the least degree of consequence—and I tell you,
    only to show how susceptible I really am still, though 'scarcely an
    invalid,' say the complimenters.


    What a way I am from your letter—that letter—or seem to be
    rather—for one may think of one thing and yet go on writing
    distrustedly of other things. So you are 'grateful' to my sisters ...
    you! Now I beseech you not to talk such extravagances; I mean such
    extravagances as words like these imply—and there are far worse
    words than these, in the letter ... such as I need not put my finger
    on; words which are sense on my lips, but no sense at all on yours,
    and which make me disquietedly sure that you are under an illusion.
    Observe!—certainly I should not choose to have a 'claim,' see!
    Only, what I object to, in 'illusions,' 'miracles,' and things of that
    sort, is the want of continuity common to such. When Joshua caused the
    sun to stand still, it was not for a year even!—Ungrateful, I am!


    And 'pretty well' means 'not well' I am afraid—or I should be gladder
    still of the new act. You will tell me on Tuesday what 'pretty well'
    means, and if your mother is better—or I may have a letter
    to-morrow—dearest! May God bless you!


    To-morrow too, at half past three o'clock, how joyful I shall be that
    my 'kind considerateness' decided not to receive you until Tuesday. My
    very kind considerateness, which made me eat my dinner to-day!

Your own
Ba.


    A hundred letters I have, by this last, ... to set against Napoleon's
    Hundred Days—did you know that?


    So much better I am to-night: it was nothing but a little chill from
    the damp—the fog, you see!


