
Monday Morning.
[Post-mark, January 19, 1846.]


    Love, if you knew but how vexed I was, so very few minutes after my
    note left last night; how angry with the unnecessary harshness into
    which some of the phrases might be construed—you would forgive me,
    indeed. But, when all is confessed and forgiven, the fact
    remains—that it would be the one trial I know I should not be able
    to bear; the repetition of these 'scenes'—intolerable—not to be
    written of, even my mind refuses to form a clear conception of them.


    My own loved letter is come—and the news; of which the reassuring
    postscript lets the interrupted joy flow on again. Well, and I am not
    to be grateful for that; nor that you do 'eat your dinner'? Indeed
    you will be ingenious to prevent me! I fancy myself meeting you on
    'the stairs'—stairs and passages generally, and galleries (ah, thou
    indeed!) all, with their picturesque accidents, of landing-places,
    and spiral heights and depths, and sudden turns and visions of half
    open doors into what Quarles calls 'mollitious chambers'—and above
    all, landing-places—they are my heart's delight—I would come upon
    you unaware in a landing-place in my next dream! One day we may walk
    on the galleries round and over the inner court of the Doges' Palace
    at Venice; and read, on tablets against the wall, how such an one was
    banished for an 'enormous dig (intacco) into the public
    treasure'—another for ... what you are not to know because his
    friends have got chisels and chipped away the record of it—underneath
    the 'giants' on their stands, and in the midst of the cortile the
    bronze fountains whence the girls draw water.


    So you too wrote French verses?—Mine were of less lofty
    argument—one couplet makes me laugh now for the reason of its false
    quantity—I translated the Ode of Alcæus; and the last couplet ran
    thus....

Harmodius, et toi, cher Aristogiton!
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *     *     *     *     *
Comme l'astre du jour, brillera votre nom!


The fact was, I could not bear to hurt my French Master's
    feelings—who inveterately maltreated 'ai's and oi's' and in this
    instance, an 'ei.' But 'Pauline' is altogether of a different sort of
    precocity—you shall see it when I can master resolution to transcribe
    the explanation which I know is on the fly-leaf of a copy here. Of
    that work, the Athenæum said [several words erased] now, what
    outrageous folly! I care, and you care, precisely nothing about its
    sayings and doings—yet here I talk!


    Now to you—Ba! When I go through sweetness to sweetness, at 'Ba' I
    stop last of all, and lie and rest. That is the quintessence of them
    all,—they all take colour and flavour from that. So, dear, dear Ba,
    be glad as you can to see me to-morrow. God knows how I embalm every
    such day,—I do not believe that one of the forty is confounded with
    another in my memory. So, that is gained and sure for ever. And of
    letters, this makes my 104th and, like Donne's Bride,

         ... I take,
My jewels from their boxes; call
My Diamonds, Pearls, and Emeralds, and make
Myself a constellation of them all!


Bless you, my own Beloved!


    I am much better to-day—having been not so well yesterday—whence the
    note to you, perhaps! I put that to your charity for construction. By
    the way, let the foolish and needless story about my whilome friend be
    of this use, that it records one of the traits in that same generous
    love, of me, I once mentioned, I remember—one of the points in his
    character which, I told you, would account, if you heard them, for
    my parting company with a good deal of warmth of attachment to myself.


    What a day! But you do not so much care for rain, I think. My Mother
    is no worse, but still suffering sadly.

Ever your own, dearest ever—


