
Wednesday.
[Post-mark, January 22, 1846.]


    Ever since I ceased to be with you—ever dearest,—have been with your
    'Luria,' if that is ceasing to be with you—which it is, I feel at
    last. Yet the new act is powerful and subtle, and very affecting, it
    seems to me, after a grave, suggested pathos; the reasoning is done on
    every hand with admirable directness and adroitness, and poor Luria's
    iron baptism under such a bright crossing of swords, most miserably
    complete. Still ... is he to die so? can you mean it? Oh—indeed I
    foresaw that—not a guess of mine ever touched such an end—and I
    can scarcely resign myself to it as a necessity, even now ... I mean,
    to the act, as Luria's act, whether it is final or not—the act of
    suicide being so unheroical. But you are a dramatic poet and right
    perhaps, where, as a didactic poet, you would have been wrong, ...
    and, after the first shock, I begin to see that your Luria is the man
    Luria and that his 'sun' lights him so far and not farther than so,
    and to understand the natural reaction of all that generous trust and
    hopefulness, what naturally it would be. Also, it is satisfactory that
    Domizia, having put her woman's part off to the last, should be too
    late with it—it will be a righteous retribution. I had fancied that
    her object was to isolate him, ... to make his military glory and
    national recompense ring hollowly to his ears, and so commend herself,
    drawing back the veil.


    Puccio's scornful working out of the low work, is very finely given,
    I think, ... and you have 'a cunning right hand,' to lift up Luria
    higher in the mind of your readers, by the very means used to pull
    down his fortunes—you show what a man he is by the very talk of his
    rivals ... by his 'natural godship' over Puccio. Then Husain is nobly
    characteristic—I like those streaks of Moorish fire in his speeches.
    'Why 'twas all fighting' &c. ... that passage perhaps is over-subtle
    for a Husain—but too nobly right in the abstract to be altered, if it
    is so or not. Domizia talks philosophically besides, and how
    eloquently;—and very noble she is where she proclaims

The angel in thee and rejects the sprites
That ineffectual crowd about his strength,
And mingle with his work and claim a share!—

But why not 'spirits' rather than 'sprites,' which has a different
    association by custom? 'Spirits' is quite short enough, it seems to
    me, for a last word—it sounds like a monosyllable that trembles—or
    thrills, rather. And, do you know, I agree with yourself a little when
    you say (as did you not say?) that some of the speeches—Domizia's
    for instance—are too lengthy. I think I should like them to coil up
    their strength, here and there, in a few passages. Luria ... poor
    Luria ... is great and pathetic when he stands alone at last, and 'all
    his waves have gone over him.' Poor Luria!—And now, I wonder where
    Mr. Chorley will look, in this work,—along all the edges of the
    hills,—to find, or prove, his favourite 'mist!' On the glass of his
    own opera-lorgnon, perhaps:—shall we ask him to try that?


    But first, I want to ask you something—I have had it in my head a
    long time, but it might as well have been in a box—and indeed if it
    had been in the box with your letters, I should have remembered to
    speak of it long ago. So now, at last, tell me—how do you write, O my
    poet? with steel pens, or Bramah pens, or goose-quills or
    crow-quills?—Because I have a penholder which was given to me when I
    was a child, and which I have used both then and since in the
    production of various great epics and immortal 'works,' until in these
    latter years it has seemed to me too heavy, and I have taken into
    service, instead of it, another two-inch-long instrument which makes
    Mr. Kenyon laugh to look at—and so, my fancy has run upon your having
    the heavier holder, which is not very heavy after all, and which will
    make you think of me whether you choose it or not, besides being made
    of a splinter from the ivory gate of old, and therefore not unworthy
    of a true prophet. Will you have it, dearest? Yes—because you can't
    help it. When you come ... on Saturday!—


    And for 'Pauline,' ... I am satisfied with the promise to see it some
    day ... when we are in the isle of the sirens, or ready for wandering
    in the Doges' galleries. I seem to understand that you would really
    rather wish me not to see it now ... and as long as I do see it! So
    that shall be!—Am I not good now, and not a teazer? If there is any
    poetical justice in 'the seven worlds,' I shall have a letter
    to-night.


    By the way, you owe me two letters by your confession. A hundred and
    four of mine you have, and I, only a hundred and two of yours ...
    which is a 'deficit' scarcely creditable to me, (now is it?) when,
    according to the law and ordinance, a woman's hundred and four letters
    would take two hundred and eight at least, from the other side, to
    justify them. Well—I feel inclined to wring out the legal per centage
    to the uttermost farthing; but fall into a fit of gratitude,
    notwithstanding, thinking of Monday, and how the second letter came
    beyond hope. Always better, you are, than I guess you to be,—and it
    was being best, to write, as you did, for me to hear twice on one
    day!—best and dearest!


    But the first letter was not what you feared—I know you too well not
    to know how that letter was written and with what intention. Do
    you, on the other hand, endeavour to comprehend how there may be an
    eccentricity and obliquity in certain relations and on certain
    subjects, while the general character stands up worthily of esteem and
    regard—even of yours. Mr. Kenyon says broadly that it is
    monomania—neither more nor less. Then the principle of passive filial
    obedience is held—drawn (and quartered) from Scripture. He sees the
    law and the gospel on his side. Only the other day, there was a
    setting forth of the whole doctrine, I hear, down-stairs—'passive
    obedience, and particularly in respect to marriage.' One after the
    other, my brothers all walked out of the room, and there was left for
    sole auditor, Captain Surtees Cook, who had especial reasons for
    sitting it out against his will,—so he sate and asked 'if children
    were to be considered slaves' as meekly as if he were asking for
    information. I could not help smiling when I heard of it. He is just
    succeeding in obtaining what is called an 'adjutancy,' which, with
    the half pay, will put an end to many anxieties.


    Dearest—when, in the next dream, you meet me in the 'landing-place,'
    tell me why I am to stand up to be reviewed again. What a fancy,
    that is of yours, for 'full-lengths'—and what bad policy, if a
    fancy, to talk of it so! because you would have had the glory and
    advantage, and privilege, of seeing me on my feet twenty times before
    now, if you had not impressed on me, in some ineffable manner, that to
    stand on my head would scarcely be stranger. Nevertheless you shall
    have it your own way, as you have everything—which makes you so very,
    very, exemplarily submissive, you know!


    Mr. Kenyon does not come—puts it off to Saturday perhaps.


    The Daily News I have had a glance at. A weak leading article, I
    thought ... and nothing stronger from Ireland:—but enough
    advertisements to promise a long future. What do you think? or have
    you not seen the paper? No broad principles laid down. A mere
    newspaper-support of the 'League.'


    May God bless you. Say how you are—and do walk, and 'care' for
    yourself,

and, so, for your own
Ba.


    Have I expressed to you at all how 'Luria' impresses me more and
    more? You shall see the 'remarks' with the other papers—the details
    of what strikes me.


