
Thursday Morning.
[Post-mark, January 22, 1846.]


    But you did not get the letter last evening—no, for all my good
    intentions—because somebody came over in the morning and forced me to
    go out ... and, perhaps, I knew what was coming, and had all my
    thoughts there, that is, here now, with my own letters from you. I
    think so—for this punishment, I will tell you, came for some sin or
    other last night. I woke—late, or early—and, in one of those lucid
    moments when all things are thoroughly perceived,—whether suggested
    by some forgotten passage in the past sleep itself, I don't know—but
    I seem to apprehend, comprehend entirely, for the first time, what
    would happen if I lost you—the whole sense of that closed door of
    Catarina's came on me at once, and it was I who said—not as quoting
    or adapting another's words, but spontaneously, unavoidably, 'In that
    door, you will not enter, I have'.... And, dearest, the


    Unwritten it must remain.


    What is on the other leaf, no ill-omen, after all,—because I
    strengthened myself against a merely imaginary evil—as I do always;
    and thus—I know I never can lose you,—you surely are more mine,
    there is less for the future to give or take away than in the
    ordinary cases, where so much less is known, explained, possessed, as
    with us. Understand for me, my dearest—


    And do you think, sweet, that there is any free movement of my soul
    which your penholder is to secure? Well, try,—it will be yours by
    every right of discovery—and I, for my part, will religiously report
    to you the first time I think of you 'which, but for your present I
    should not have done'—or is it not a happy, most happy way of
    ensuring a better fifth act to Luria than the foregoing? See the
    absurdity I write—when it will be more probably the ruin of the
    whole—for was it not observed in the case of a friend of mine once,
    who wrote his own part in a piece for private theatricals, and had
    ends of his own to serve in it,—that he set to work somewhat after
    this fashion: 'Scene 1st. A breakfast chamber—Lord and Lady A. at
    table—Lady A./ No more coffee my dear?—Lord A./ One more cup!
    (Embracing her). Lady A./ I was thinking of trying the ponies in the
    Park—are you engaged? Lord A./ Why, there's that bore of a Committee
    at the House till 2. (Kissing her hand).' And so forth, to the
    astonishment of the auditory, who did not exactly see the 'sequitur'
    in either instance. Well, dearest, whatever comes of it, the 'aside,'
    the bye-play, the digression, will be the best, and only true business
    of the piece. And though I must smile at your notion of securing
    that by any fresh appliance, mechanical or spiritual, yet I do thank
    you, dearest, thank you from my heart indeed—(and I write with
    Bramahs always—not being able to make a pen!)


    If you have gone so far with 'Luria,' I fancy myself nearly or
    altogether safe. I must not tell you, but I wished just these feelings
    to be in your mind about Domizia, and the death of Luria: the last act
    throws light back on all, I hope. Observe only, that Luria would
    stand, if I have plied him effectually with adverse influences, in
    such a position as to render any other end impossible without the hurt
    to Florence which his religion is, to avoid inflicting—passively
    awaiting, for instance, the sentence and punishment to come at night,
    would as surely inflict it as taking part with her foes. His aim is to
    prevent the harm she will do herself by striking him, so he moves
    aside from the blow. But I know there is very much to improve and
    heighten in this fourth act, as in the others—but the right aspect of
    things seems obtained and the rest of the work is plain and easy.


    I am obliged to leave off—the rest to-morrow—and then dear,
    Saturday! I love you utterly, my own best, dearest—


