
Thursday Night.
[Post-mark, January 23, 1846.]


    Yes, I understand your 'Luria'—and there is to be more light; and I
    open the window to the east and wait for it—a little less gladly than
    for you on Saturday, dearest. In the meanwhile you have 'lucid
    moments,' and 'strengthen' yourself into the wisdom of learning to
    love me—and, upon consideration, it does not seem to be so hard after
    all ... there is 'less for the future to take away' than you had
    supposed—so that is the way? Ah, 'these lucid moments, in which all
    things are thoroughly perceived';—what harm they do me!—And I am
    to 'understand for you,' you say!—Am I?


    On the other side, and to make the good omen complete, I remembered,
    after I had sealed my last letter, having made a confusion between the
    ivory and horn gates, the gates of false and true visions, as I am apt
    to do—and my penholder belongs to the ivory gate, ... as you will
    perceive in your lucid moments—poor holder! But, as you forget me on
    Wednesdays, the post testifying, ... the sinecure may not be quite so
    certain as the Thursday's letter says. And I too, in the meanwhile,
    grow wiser, ... having learnt something which you cannot do,—you of
    the 'Bells and Pomegranates': You cannot make a pen. Yesterday I
    looked round the world in vain for it.


    Mr. Kenyon does not come—will not perhaps until Saturday! Which
    reminds me—Mr. Kenyon told me about a year ago that he had been
    painfully employed that morning in parting two—dearer than
    friends—and he had done it he said, by proving to either, that he or
    she was likely to mar the prospects of the other. 'If I had spoken to
    each, of himself or herself,' he said, 'I never could have done it.'


    Was not that an ingenious cruelty? The remembrance rose up in me
    like a ghost, and made me ask you once to promise what you promised
    ... (you recollect?) because I could not bear to be stabbed with my
    own dagger by the hand of a third person ... so! When people have
    lucid moments themselves, you know, it is different.


    And shall I indeed have a letter to-morrow? Or, not having the
    penholder yet, will you....


    Goodnight. May God bless you—

Ever and wholly your
Ba.


