
[Post-mark, January 23, 1846.]


    Now, of all perverse interpretations that ever were and never ought to
    have been, commend me to this of Ba's—after I bade her generosity
    'understand me,' too!—which meant, 'let her pick out of my disjointed
    sentences a general meaning, if she can,—which I very well know their
    imperfect utterance would not give to one unsupplied with the key of
    my whole heart's-mystery'—and Ba, with the key in her hand, to
    pretend and poke feathers and penholders into the key-hole, and
    complain that the wards are wrong! So—when the poor scholar, one has
    read of, uses not very dissimilar language and argument—who being
    threatened with the deprivation of his Virgil learnt the Æneid by
    heart and then said 'Take what you can now'!—that Ba calls
    'feeling the loss would not be so hard after all'!—I do not, at
    least. And if at any future moment I should again be visited—as I
    earnestly desire may never be the case—with a sudden consciousness of
    the entire inutility of all earthly love (since of my love) to hold
    its object back from the decree of God, if such should call it away;
    one of those known facts which, for practical good, we treat as
    supremely common-place, but which, like those of the uncertainty of
    life—the very existence of God, I may say—if they were not
    common-place, and could they be thoroughly apprehended (except in the
    chance minutes which make one grow old, not the mere years)—the
    business of the world would cease; but when you find Chaucer's graver
    at his work of 'graving smale seles' by the sun's light, you know that
    the sun's self could not have been created on that day—do you
    'understand' that, Ba? And when I am with you, or here or writing or
    walking—and perfectly happy in the sunshine of you, I very well know
    I am no wiser than is good for me and that there seems no harm in
    feeling it impossible this should change, or fail to go on increasing
    till this world ends and we are safe, I with you, for ever. But
    when—if only once, as I told you, recording it for its very
    strangeness, I do feel—in a flash—that words are words, and could
    not alter that decree ... will you tell me how, after all, that
    conviction and the true woe of it are better met than by the as
    thorough conviction that, for one blessing, the extreme woe is
    impossible now—that you are, and have been, mine, and me—one
    with me, never to be parted—so that the complete separation not being
    to be thought of, such an incomplete one as is yet in Fate's power may
    be the less likely to attract her notice? And, dearest, in all
    emergencies, see, I go to you for help; for your gift of better
    comfort than is found in myself. Or ought I, if I could, to add one
    more proof to the Greek proverb 'that the half is greater than the
    whole'—and only love you for myself (it is absurd; but if I could
    disentwine you from my soul in that sense), only see my own will, and
    good (not in your will and good, as I now see them and shall ever
    see) ... should you say I did love you then? Perhaps. And it would
    have been better for me, I know—I should not have written this or
    the like—there being no post in the Siren's isle, as you will see.


    And the end of the whole matter is—what? Not by any means what my Ba
    expects or ought to expect; that I say with a flounce 'Catch me
    blotting down on paper, again, the first vague impressions in the
    weakest words and being sure I have only to bid her
    "understand"!—when I can get "Blair on Rhetoric," and the additional
    chapter on the proper conduct of a letter'! On the contrary I tell
    you, Ba, my own heart's dearest, I will provoke you tenfold worse;
    will tell you all that comes uppermost, and what frightens me or
    reassures me, in moments lucid or opaque—and when all the pen-stumps
    and holders refuse to open the lock, out will come the key perforce;
    and once put that knowledge—of the entire love and worship of my
    heart and soul—to its proper use, and all will be clear—tell me
    to-morrow that it will be clear when I call you to account and exact
    strict payment for every word and phrase and full-stop and partial
    stop, and no stop at all, in this wicked little note which got so
    treacherously the kisses and the thankfulness—written with no
    penholder that is to belong to me, I hope—but with the feather,
    possibly, which Sycorax wiped the dew from, as Caliban remembered when
    he was angry! All but—(that is, all was wrong but)—to be just ...
    the old, dear, so dear ending which makes my heart beat now as at
    first ... and so, pays for all! Wherefore, all is right again, is it
    not? and you are my own priceless Ba, my very own—and I will have
    you, if you like that style, and want you, and must have you every day
    and all day long—much less see you to-morrow stand—


    ... Now, there breaks down my new spirit—and, shame or no, I must
    pray you, in the old way, not to receive me standing—I should not
    remain master of myself I do believe!


    You have put out of my head all I intended to write—and now I slowly
    begin to remember the matters they seem strangely unimportant—that
    poor impotency of a Newspaper! No—nothing of that for the present.
    To-morrow my dearest! Ba's first comment—'To-morrow? To-day is
    too soon, it seems—yet it is wise, perhaps, to avoid the satiety &c.
    &c. &c. &c. &c.'


    Does she feel how I kissed that comment back on her dear self as fit
    punishment?


