
[Post-mark, January 26, 1846.]


    I must begin by invoking my own stupidity! To forget after all the
    penholder! I had put it close beside me too on the table, and never
    once thought of it afterwards from first to last—just as I should do
    if I had a common-place book, the memoranda all turning to
    obliviscenda as by particular contact. So I shall send the holder with
    Miss Martineau's books which you can read or not as you like ... they
    have beauty in passages ... but, trained up against the wall of a set
    design, want room for branching and blossoming, great as her skill is.
    I like her 'Playfellow' stories twice as well. Do you know them?
    Written for children, and in such a fine heroic child-spirit as to be
    too young and too old for nobody. Oh, and I send you besides a most
    frightful extract from an American magazine sent to me yesterday ...
    no, the day before ... on the subject of mesmerism—and you are to
    understand, if you please, that the Mr. Edgar Poe who stands committed
    in it, is my dedicator ... whose dedication I forgot, by the way, with
    the rest—so, while I am sending, you shall have his poems with his
    mesmeric experience and decide whether the outrageous compliment to
    E.B.B. or the experiment on M. Vandeleur [Valdemar] goes furthest to
    prove him mad. There is poetry in the man, though, now and then, seen
    between the great gaps of bathos.... 'Politian' will make you
    laugh—as the 'Raven' made me laugh, though with something in it
    which accounts for the hold it took upon people such as Mr. N.P.
    Willis and his peers—it was sent to me from four different quarters
    besides the author himself, before its publication in this form, and
    when it had only a newspaper life. Some of the other lyrics have power
    of a less questionable sort. For the author, I do not know him at
    all—never heard from him nor wrote to him—and in my opinion, there
    is more faculty shown in the account of that horrible mesmeric
    experience (mad or not mad) than in his poems. Now do read it from the
    beginning to the end. That 'going out' of the hectic, struck me very
    much ... and the writhing away of the upper lip. Most
    horrible!—Then I believe so much of mesmerism, as to give room for
    the full acting of the story on me ... without absolutely giving full
    credence to it, understand.


    Ever dearest, you could not think me in earnest in that letter? It was
    because I understood you so perfectly that I felt at liberty for the
    jesting a little—for had I not thought of that before, myself, and
    was I not reproved for speaking of it, when I said that I was content,
    for my part, even so? Surely you remember—and I should not have
    said it if I had not felt with you, felt and known, that 'there is,
    with us, less for the future to give or take away than in the ordinary
    cases.' So much less! All the happiness I have known has come to me
    through you, and it is enough to live for or die in—therefore living
    or dying I would thank God, and use that word 'enough' ... being
    yours in life and death. And always understanding that if either of us
    should go, you must let it be this one here who was nearly gone when
    she knew you, since I could not bear—


    Now see if it is possible to write on this subject, unless one laughs
    to stop the tears. I was more wise on Friday.


    Let me tell you instead of my sister's affairs, which are so publicly
    talked of in this house that there is no confidence to be broken in
    respect to them—yet my brothers only see and hear, and are told
    nothing, to keep them as clear as possible from responsibility. I may
    say of Henrietta that her only fault is, her virtues being written in
    water—I know not of one other fault. She has too much softness to be
    able to say 'no' in the right place—and thus, without the slightest
    levity ... perfectly blameless in that respect, ... she says half a
    yes or a quarter of a yes, or a yes in some sort of form, too
    often—but I will tell you. Two years ago, three men were loving her,
    as they called it. After a few months, and the proper quantity of
    interpretations, one of them consoled himself by giving nick-names to
    his rivals. Perseverance and Despair he called them, and so, went up
    to the boxes to see out the rest of the play. Despair ran to a crisis,
    was rejected in so many words, but appealed against the judgment and
    had his claim admitted—it was all silence and mildness on each side
    ... a tacit gaining of ground,—Despair 'was at least a gentleman,'
    said my brothers. On which Perseverance came on with violent
    re-iterations,—insisted that she loved him without knowing it, or
    should—elbowed poor Despair into the open streets, who being a
    gentleman wouldn't elbow again—swore that 'if she married another he
    would wait till she became a widow, trusting to Providence' ... did
    wait every morning till the head of the house was out, and sate day by
    day, in spite of the disinclination of my sisters and the rudeness of
    all my brothers, four hours in the drawing-room ... let himself be
    refused once a week and sate all the longer ... allowed everybody in
    the house (and a few visitors) to see and hear him in fits of
    hysterical sobbing, and sate on unabashed, the end being that he sits
    now sole regnant, my poor sister saying softly, with a few tears of
    remorse for her own instability, that she is 'taken by storm and
    cannot help it.' I give you only the résumé of this military
    movement—and though I seem to smile, which it was impossible to avoid
    at some points of the evidence as I heard it from first one person and
    then another, yet I am woman enough rather to be glad that the
    decision is made so. He is sincerely attached to her, I believe; and
    the want of refinement and sensibility (for he understood her
    affections to be engaged to another at one time) is covered in a
    measure by the earnestness,—and justified too by the event—everybody
    being quite happy and contented, even to Despair, who has a new horse
    and takes lessons in music.


    That's love—is it not? And that's my answer (if you look for it) to
    the question you asked me yesterday.


    Yet do not think that I am turning it all to game. I could not do so
    with any real earnest sentiment ... I never could ... and now least,
    and with my own sister whom I love so. One may smile to oneself and
    yet wish another well—and so I smile to you—and it is all safe
    with you I know. He is a second or third cousin of ours and has golden
    opinions from all his friends and fellow-officers—and for the rest,
    most of these men are like one another.... I never could see the
    difference between fuller's earth and common clay, among them all.


    What do you think he has said since—to her too?—'I always
    persevere about everything. Once I began to write a farce—which they
    told me was as bad as could be. Well!—I persevered!—I finished
    it.' Perfectly unconscious, both he and she were of there being
    anything mal à propos in that—and no kind of harm was meant,—only
    it expresses the man.


    Dearest—it had better be Thursday I think—our day! I was showing
    to-day your father's drawings,—and my brothers, and Arabel besides,
    admired them very much on the right grounds. Say how you are. You did
    not seem to me to answer frankly this time, and I was more than half
    uneasy when you went away. Take exercise, dear, dearest ... think of
    me enough for it,—and do not hurry 'Luria.' May God bless you!

Your own
Ba.


