
Sunday Evening.
[Post-mark, January 26, 1846.]


    I will not try and write much to-night, dearest, for my head gives a
    little warning—and I have so much to think of!—spite of my penholder
    being kept back from me after all! Now, ought I to have asked for it?
    Or did I not seem grateful enough at the promise? This last would be a
    characteristic reason, seeing that I reproached myself with feeling
    too grateful for the 'special symbol'—the 'essential meaning' of
    which was already in my soul. Well then, I will—I do pray for
    it—next time; and I will keep it for that one yesterday and all its
    memories—and it shall bear witness against me, if, on the Siren's
    isle, I grow forgetful of Wimpole Street. And when is 'next time' to
    be—Wednesday or Thursday? When I look back on the strangely steady
    widening of my horizon—how no least interruption has occurred to
    visits or letters—oh, care you, sweet—care for us both!


    That remark of your sister's delights me—you remember?—that the
    anger would not be so formidable. I have exactly the fear of
    encountering that, which the sense of having to deal with a ghost
    would induce: there's no striking at it with one's partizan. Well, God
    is above all! It is not my fault if it so happens that by returning my
    love you make me exquisitely blessed; I believe—more than hope, I am
    sure I should do all I ever now can do, if you were never to know
    it—that is, my love for you was in the first instance its own
    reward—if one must use such phrases—and if it were possible for
    that ... not anger, which is of no good, but that opposition—that
    adverse will—to show that your good would be attained by the—


    But it would need to be shown to me. You have said thus to me—in
    the very last letter, indeed. But with me, or any man, the instincts
    of happiness develop themselves too unmistakably where there is
    anything like a freedom of will. The man whose heart is set on being
    rich or influential after the worldly fashion, may be found far enough
    from the attainment of either riches or influence—but he will be in
    the presumed way to them—pumping at the pump, if he is really anxious
    for water, even though the pump be dry—but not sitting still by the
    dusty roadside.


    I believe—first of all, you—but when that is done, and I am allowed
    to call your heart mine,—I cannot think you would be happy if
    parted from me—and that belief, coming to add to my own feeling in
    that case. So, this will be—I trust in God.


    In life, in death, I am your own, my own! My head has got well
    already! It is so slight a thing, that I make such an ado about! Do
    not reply to these bodings—they are gone—they seem absurd! All steps
    secured but the last, and that last the easiest! Yes—far easiest! For
    first you had to be created, only that; and then, in my time; and
    then, not in Timbuctoo but Wimpole Street, and then ... the strange
    hedge round the sleeping Palace keeping the world off—and then ...
    all was to begin, all the difficulty only begin:—and now ... see
    where is reached! And I kiss you, and bless you, my dearest, in
    earnest of the end!


