
Monday.
[Post-mark, January 27, 1846.]


    You have had my letter and heard about the penholder. Your fancy of
    'not seeming grateful enough,' is not wise enough for you, dearest;
    when you know that I know your common fault to be the undue
    magnifying of everything that comes from me, and I am always
    complaining of it outwardly and inwardly. That suddenly I should set
    about desiring you to be more grateful,—even for so great a boon as
    an old penholder,—would be a more astounding change than any to be
    sought or seen in a prime minister.


    Another mistake you made concerning Henrietta and her opinion—and
    there's no use nor comfort in leaving you in it. Henrietta says that
    the 'anger would not be so formidable after all'! Poor dearest
    Henrietta, who trembles at the least bending of the brows ... who has
    less courage than I, and the same views of the future! What she
    referred to, was simply the infrequency of the visits. 'Why was I
    afraid,' she said—'where was the danger? who would be the
    informer?'—Well! I will not say any more. It is just natural that
    you, in your circumstances and associations, should be unable to see
    what I have seen from the beginning—only you will not hereafter
    reproach me, in the most secret of your thoughts, for not having told
    you plainly. If I could have told you with greater plainness I should
    blame myself (and I do not) because it is not an opinion I have, but a
    perception. I see, I know. The result ... the end of all ... perhaps
    now and then I see that too ... in the 'lucid moments' which are not
    the happiest for anybody. Remember, in all cases, that I shall not
    repent of any part of our past intercourse; and that, therefore, when
    the time for decision comes, you will be free to look at the question
    as if you saw it then for the first moment, without being hampered by
    considerations about 'all those yesterdays.'


    For him ... he would rather see me dead at his foot than yield the
    point: and he will say so, and mean it, and persist in the meaning.


    Do you ever wonder at me ... that I should write such things, and have
    written others so different? I have thought that in myself very
    often. Insincerity and injustice may seem the two ends, while I
    occupy the straight betwixt two—and I should not like you to doubt
    how this may be! Sometimes I have begun to show you the truth, and
    torn the paper; I could not. Yet now again I am borne on to tell
    you, ... to save you from some thoughts which you cannot help perhaps.


    There has been no insincerity—nor is there injustice. I believe, I am
    certain, I have loved him better than the rest of his children. I have
    heard the fountain within the rock, and my heart has struggled in
    towards him through the stones of the rock ... thrust off ... dropping
    off ... turning in again and clinging! Knowing what is excellent in
    him well, loving him as my only parent left, and for himself dearly,
    notwithstanding that hardness and the miserable 'system' which made
    him appear harder still, I have loved him and been proud of him for
    his high qualities, for his courage and fortitude when he bore up so
    bravely years ago under the worldly reverses which he yet felt
    acutely—more than you and I could feel them—but the fortitude was
    admirable. Then came the trials of love—then, I was repulsed too
    often, ... made to suffer in the suffering of those by my side ...
    depressed by petty daily sadnesses and terrors, from which it is
    possible however for an elastic affection to rise again as past. Yet
    my friends used to say 'You look broken-spirited'—and it was true. In
    the midst, came my illness,—and when I was ill he grew gentler and
    let me draw nearer than ever I had done: and after that great stroke
    ... you know ... though that fell in the middle of a storm of
    emotion and sympathy on my part, which drove clearly against him, God
    seemed to strike our hearts together by the shock; and I was grateful
    to him for not saying aloud what I said to myself in my agony, 'If it
    had not been for you'...! And comparing my self-reproach to what I
    imagined his self-reproach must certainly be (for if I had loved
    selfishly, he had not been kind), I felt as if I could love and
    forgive him for two ... (I knowing that serene generous departed
    spirit, and seeming left to represent it) ... and I did love him
    better than all those left to me to love in the world here. I proved
    a little my affection for him, by coming to London at the risk of my
    life rather than diminish the comfort of his home by keeping a part of
    my family away from him. And afterwards for long and long he spoke to
    me kindly and gently, and of me affectionately and with too much
    praise; and God knows that I had as much joy as I imagined myself
    capable of again, in the sound of his footstep on the stairs, and of
    his voice when he prayed in this room; my best hope, as I have told
    him since, being, to die beneath his eyes. Love is so much to me
    naturally—it is, to all women! and it was so much to me to feel
    sure at last that he loved me—to forget all blame—to pull the
    weeds up from that last illusion of life:—and this, till the
    Pisa-business, which threw me off, far as ever, again—farther than
    ever—when George said 'he could not flatter me' and I dared not
    flatter myself. But do you believe that I never wrote what I did not
    feel: I never did. And I ask one kindness more ... do not notice what
    I have written here. Let it pass. We can alter nothing by ever so many
    words. After all, he is the victim. He isolates himself—and now and
    then he feels it ... the cold dead silence all round, which is the
    effect of an incredible system. If he were not stronger than most men,
    he could not bear it as he does. With such high qualities too!—so
    upright and honourable—you would esteem him, you would like him, I
    think. And so ... dearest ... let that be the last word.


    I dare say you have asked yourself sometimes, why it was that I never
    managed to draw you into the house here, so that you might make your
    own way. Now that is one of the things impossible to me. I have not
    influence enough for that. George can never invite a friend of his
    even. Do you see? The people who do come here, come by particular
    license and association ... Capt. Surtees Cook being one of them.
    Once ... when I was in high favour too ... I asked for Mr. Kenyon to
    be invited to dinner—he an old college friend, and living close by
    and so affectionate to me always—I felt that he must be hurt by the
    neglect, and asked. It was in vain. Now, you see—


    May God bless you always! I wrote all my spirits away in this letter
    yesterday, and kept it to finish to-day ... being yours every day,
    glad or sad, ever beloved!—

Your Ba.


