
Tuesday.
[Post-mark, January 27, 1846.]


    Why will you give me such unnecessary proofs of your goodness? Why not
    leave the books for me to take away, at all events? No—you must fold
    up, and tie round, and seal over, and be at all the pains in the world
    with those hands I see now. But you only threaten; say you 'shall
    send'—as yet, and nothing having come, I do pray you, if not too
    late, to save me the shame—add to the gratitude you never can now, I
    think ... only think, for you are a siren, and I don't know
    certainly to what your magic may not extend. Thus, in not so important
    a matter, I should have said, the day before yesterday, that no letter
    from you could make my heart rise within me, more than of old ...
    unless it should happen to be of twice the ordinary thickness ... and
    then there's a fear at first lest the over-running of my dealt-out
    measure should be just a note of Mr. Kenyon's, for instance! But
    yesterday the very seal began with 'Ba'—Now, always seal with that
    seal my letters, dearest! Do you recollect Donne's pretty lines about
    seals?

Quondam fessus Amor loquens Amato,
Tot et tanta loquens amica, scripsit:
Tandem et fessa manus dedit Sigillum.


And in his own English,

When love, being weary, made an end
Of kind expressions to his friend,
He writ; when hand could write no more,
He gave the seal—and so left o'er.



    (By the way, what a mercy that he never noticed the jingle in posse
    of ending 'expressions' and beginning 'impressions.')


    How your account of the actors in the 'Love's Labour Lost' amused me!
    I rather like, though, the notion of that steady, business-like
    pursuit of love under difficulties; and the sobbing proves something
    surely! Serjt. Talfourd says—is it not he who says it?—'All tears
    are not for sorrow.' I should incline to say, from my own feeling,
    that no tears were. They only express joy in me, or sympathy with
    joy—and so is it with you too, I should think.


    Understand that I do not disbelieve in Mesmerism—I only object to
    insufficient evidence being put forward as quite irrefragable. I keep
    an open sense on the subject—ready to be instructed; and should have
    refused such testimony as Miss Martineau's if it had been adduced in
    support of something I firmly believed—'non tali auxilio'—indeed,
    so has truth been harmed, and only so, from the beginning. So, I shall
    read what you bid me, and learn all I can.


    I am not quite so well this week—yesterday some friends came early
    and kept me at home—for which I seem to suffer a little; less,
    already, than in the morning—so I will go out and walk away the
    whirring ... which is all the mighty ailment. As for 'Luria' I have
    not looked at it since I saw you—which means, saw you in the body,
    because last night I saw you; as I wonder if you know!


    Thursday, and again I am with you—and you will forget nothing ... how
    the farewell is to be returned? Ah, my dearest, sweetest Ba; how
    entirely I love you!

May God bless you ever—
R.


    2. p.m. Your parcel arrives ... the penholder; now what shall I say?
    How am I to use so fine a thing even in writing to you? I will give it
    you again in our Isle, and meantime keep it where my other treasures
    are—my letters and my dear ringlet.


    Thank you—all I can thank.


