
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, January 31, 1846.]


    Let it be this way, ever dearest. If in the time of fine weather, I am
    not ill, ... then ... not now ... you shall decide, and your
    decision shall be duty and desire to me, both—I will make no
    difficulties. Remember, in the meanwhile, that I have decided to let
    it be as you shall choose ... shall choose. That I love you enough
    to give you up 'for your good,' is proof (to myself at least) that I
    love you enough for any other end:—but you thought too much of me in
    the last letter. Do not mistake me. I believe and trust in all your
    words—only you are generous unawares, as other men are selfish.


    More, I meant to say of this; but you moved me as usual yesterday into
    the sunshine, and then I am dazzled and cannot see clearly. Still I
    see that you love me and that I am bound to you:—and 'what more need
    I see,' you may ask; while I cannot help looking out to the future, to
    the blue ridges of the hills, to the chances of your being happy
    with me. Well! I am yours as you see ... and not yours to teaze you.
    You shall decide everything when the time comes for doing anything ...
    and from this to then, I do not, dearest, expect you to use 'the
    liberty of leaping out of the window,' unless you are sure of the
    house being on fire! Nobody shall push you out of the window—least of
    all, I.


    For Italy ... you are right. We should be nearer the sun, as you say,
    and further from the world, as I think—out of hearing of the great
    storm of gossiping, when 'scirocco is loose.' Even if you liked to
    live altogether abroad, coming to England at intervals, it would be no
    sacrifice for me—and whether in Italy or England, we should have
    sufficient or more than sufficient means of living, without modifying
    by a line that 'good free life' of yours which you reasonably
    praise—which, if it had been necessary to modify, we must have
    parted, ... because I could not have borne to see you do it; though,
    that you once offered it for my sake, I never shall forget.


    Mr. Kenyon stayed half an hour, and asked, after you went, if you had
    been here long. I reproached him with what they had been doing at his
    club (the Athenæum) in blackballing Douglas Jerrold, for want of
    something better to say—and he had not heard of it. There were more
    black than white balls, and Dickens was so enraged at the repulse of
    his friend that he gave in his own resignation like a privy
    councillor.


    But the really bad news is of poor Tennyson—I forgot to tell you—I
    forget everything. He is seriously ill with an internal complaint and
    confined to his bed, as George heard from a common friend. Which does
    not prevent his writing a new poem—he has finished the second book of
    it—and it is in blank verse and a fairy tale, and called the
    'University,' the university-members being all females. If George has
    not diluted the scheme of it with some law from the Inner Temple, I
    don't know what to think—it makes me open my eyes. Now isn't the
    world too old and fond of steam, for blank verse poems, in ever so
    many books, to be written on the fairies? I hope they may cure him,
    for the best deed they can do. He is not precisely in danger,
    understand—but the complaint may run into danger—so the account
    went.


    And you? how are you? Mind to tell me. May God bless you. Is Monday or
    Tuesday to be our day? If it were not for Mr. Kenyon I should take
    courage and say Monday—but Tuesday and Saturday would do as
    well—would they not?

Your own
Ba.


    Shall I have a letter?


