
Saturday.
[Post-mark, January 31, 1846.]


    It is a relief to me this time to obey your wish, and reserve further
    remark on that subject till by and bye. And, whereas some people, I
    suppose, have to lash themselves up to the due point of passion, and
    choose the happy minutes to be as loving in as they possibly can ...
    (that is, in expression; the just correspondency of word to fact and
    feeling: for it—the love—may be very truly there, at the bottom,
    when it is got at, and spoken out)—quite otherwise, I do really have
    to guard my tongue and set a watch on my pen ... that so I may say as
    little as can well be likely to be excepted to by your generosity.
    Dearest, love means love, certainly, and adoration carries its
    sense with it—and so, you may have received my feeling in that
    shape—but when I begin to hint at the merest putting into practice
    one or the other profession, you 'fly out'—instead of keeping your
    throne. So let this letter lie awhile, till my heart is more used to
    it, and after some days or weeks I will find as cold and quiet a
    moment as I can, and by standing as far off you as I shall be able,
    see more—'si minus propè stes, te capiet magis.' Meanwhile, silent
    or speaking, I am yours to dispose of as that glove—not that hand.


    I must think that Mr. Kenyon sees, and knows, and ... in his goodness
    ... hardly disapproves—he knows I could not avoid—escape you—for he
    knows, in a manner, what you are ... like your American; and, early in
    our intercourse, he asked me (did I tell you?) 'what I thought of his
    young relative'—and I considered half a second to this effect—'if he
    asked me what I thought of the Queen-diamond they showed me in the
    crown of the Czar—and I answered truly—he would not return; "then of
    course you mean to try and get it to keep."' So I did tell the truth
    in a very few words. Well, it is no matter.


    I am sorry to hear of poor Tennyson's condition. The projected
    book—title, scheme, all of it,—that is astounding;—and fairies?
    If 'Thorpes and barnes, sheep-pens and dairies—this maketh that
    there ben no fairies'—locomotives and the broad or narrow gauge must
    keep the very ghosts of them away. But how the fashion of this world
    passes; the forms its beauty and truth take; if we have the making
    of such! I went last night, out of pure shame at a broken promise, to
    hear Miss Cushman and her sister in 'Romeo and Juliet.' The whole play
    goes ... horribly; 'speak' bids the Poet, and so M. Walladmir
    [Valdemar] moves his tongue and dispenses with his jaws. Whatever is
    slightly touched in, indicated, to give relief to something actually
    insisted upon and drawn boldly ... here, you have it gone over with
    an unremitting burnt-stick, till it stares black forever! Romeo goes
    whining about Verona by broad daylight. Yet when a schoolfellow of
    mine, I remember, began translating in class Virgil after this mode,
    'Sic fatur—so said Æneas; lachrymans—a-crying' ... our pedagogue
    turned on him furiously—'D'ye think Æneas made such a noise—as you
    shall, presently?' How easy to conceive a boyish half-melancholy,
    smiling at itself.


    Then Tuesday, and not Monday ... and Saturday will be the nearer
    afterward. I am singularly well to-day—head quite quiet—and
    yesterday your penholder began its influence and I wrote about half my
    last act. Writing is nothing, nor praise, nor blame, nor living, nor
    dying, but you are all my true life; May God bless you ever—

R.


