
Friday Evening.
[Post-mark, February 2, 1846.]


    Something, you said yesterday, made me happy—'that your liking for me
    did not come and go'—do you remember? Because there was a letter,
    written at a crisis long since, in which you showed yourself awfully,
    as a burning mountain, and talked of 'making the most of your
    fire-eyes,' and of having at intervals 'deep black pits of cold
    water'!—and the lava of that letter has kept running down into my
    thoughts of you too much, until quite of late—while even yesterday I
    was not too well instructed to be 'happy,' you see! Do not reproach
    me! I would not have 'heard your enemy say so'—it was your own word!
    And the other long word idiosyncrasy seemed long enough to cover it;
    and it might have been a matter of temperament, I fancied, that a man
    of genius, in the mystery of his nature, should find his feelings
    sometimes like dumb notes in a piano ... should care for people at
    half past eleven on Tuesday, and on Wednesday at noon prefer a black
    beetle. How you frightened me with your 'fire-eyes'! 'making the most
    of them' too! and the 'black pits,' which gaped ... where did they
    gape? who could tell? Oh—but lately I have not been crossed so, of
    course, with those fabulous terrors—lately that horror of the burning
    mountain has grown more like a superstition than a rational fear!—and
    if I was glad ... happy ... yesterday, it was but as a tolerably
    sensible nervous man might be glad of a clearer moonlight, showing him
    that what he had half shuddered at for a sheeted ghoule, was only a
    white horse on the moor. Such a great white horse!—call it the
    'mammoth horse'—the 'real mammoth,' this time!


    Dearest, did I write you a cold letter the last time? Almost it seems
    so to me! the reason being that my feelings were near to overflow, and
    that I had to hold the cup straight to prevent the possible dropping
    on your purple underneath. Your letter, the letter I answered, was
    in my heart ... is in my heart—and all the yeses in the world would
    not be too many for such a letter, as I felt and feel. Also, perhaps,
    I gave you, at last, a merely formal distinction—and it comes to the
    same thing practically without any doubt! but I shrank, with a sort of
    instinct, from appearing (to myself, mind) to take a security from
    your words now (said too on an obvious impulse) for what should,
    would, must, depend on your deliberate wishes hereafter. You
    understand—you will not accuse me of over-cautiousness and the like.
    On the contrary, you are all things to me, ... instead of all and
    better than all! You have fallen like a great luminous blot on the
    whole leaf of the world ... of life and time ... and I can see nothing
    beyond you, nor wish to see it. As to all that was evil and sadness to
    me, I do not feel it any longer—it may be raining still, but I am in
    the shelter and can scarcely tell. If you could be too dear to me
    you would be now—but you could not—I do not believe in those
    supposed excesses of pure affections—God cannot be too great.


    Therefore it is a conditional engagement still—all the conditions
    being in your hands, except the necessary one, of my health. And shall
    I tell you what is 'not to be put in doubt ever'?—your goodness,
    that is ... and every tie that binds me to you. 'Ordained, granted
    by God' it is, that I should owe the only happiness in my life to you,
    and be contented and grateful (if it were necessary) to stop with it
    at this present point. Still I do not—there seems no necessity yet.


    May God bless you, ever dearest:—

Your own Ba.


