
Saturday.
[In the same envelope with the preceding letter.]


    Well I have your letter—and I send you the postscript to my last one,
    written yesterday you observe ... and being simply a postscript in
    some parts of it, so far it is not for an answer. Only I deny the
    'flying out'—perhaps you may do it a little more ... in your moments
    of starry centrifugal motion.


    So you think that dear Mr. Kenyon's opinion of his 'young
    relative'—(neither young nor his relative—not very much of either!)
    is to the effect that you couldn't possibly 'escape' her—? It looks
    like the sign of the Red Dragon, put so ... and your burning
    mountain is not too awful for the scenery.


    Seriously ... gravely ... if it makes me three times happy that you
    should love me, yet I grow uneasy and even saddened when you say
    infatuated things such as this and this ... unless after all you mean
    a philosophical sarcasm on the worth of Czar diamonds. No—do not say
    such things! If you do, I shall end by being jealous of some ideal
    Czarina who must stand between you and me.... I shall think that it is
    not I whom you look at ... and pour cause. 'Flying out,' that
    would be!


    And for Mr. Kenyon, I only know that I have grown the most ungrateful
    of human beings lately, and find myself almost glad when he does not
    come, certainly uncomfortable when he does—yes, really I would
    rather not see him at all, and when you are not here. The sense of
    which and the sorrow for which, turn me to a hypocrite, and make me
    ask why he does not come &c. ... questions which never came to my lips
    before ... till I am more and more ashamed and sorry. Will it end, I
    wonder, by my ceasing to care for any one in the world, except,
    except...? or is it not rather that I feel trodden down by either his
    too great penetration or too great unconsciousness, both being
    overwhelming things from him to me. From a similar cause I hate
    writing letters to any of my old friends—I feel as if it were the
    merest swindling to attempt to give the least account of myself to
    anybody, and when their letters come and I know that nothing very
    fatal has happened to them, scarcely I can read to an end afterwards
    through the besetting care of having to answer it all. Then I am
    ignoble enough to revenge myself on people for their stupidities ...
    which never in my life I did before nor felt the temptation to do ...
    and when they have a distaste for your poetry through want of
    understanding, I have a distaste for them ... cannot help it—and
    you need not say it is wrong, because I know the whole iniquity of it,
    persisting nevertheless. As for dear Mr. Kenyon—with whom we began,
    and who thinks of you as appreciatingly and admiringly as one man can
    think of another,—do not imagine that, if he should see anything,
    he can 'approve' of either your wisdom or my generosity, ... he,
    with his large organs of caution, and his habit of looking right and
    left, and round the corner a little way. Because, you know, ... if I
    should be ill before ... why there, is a conclusion!—but if
    afterward ... what? You who talk wildly of my generosity, whereas I
    only and most impotently tried to be generous, must see how both
    suppositions have their possibility. Nevertheless you are the master
    to run the latter risk. You have overcome ... to your loss
    perhaps—unless the judgment is revised. As to taking the half of my
    prison ... I could not even smile at that if it seemed probable ...
    I should recoil from your affection even under a shape so fatal to you
    ... dearest! No! There is a better probability before us I hope and
    believe—in spite of the possibility which it is impossible to deny.
    And now we leave this subject for the present.


    Sunday.—You are 'singularly well.' You are very seldom quite well,
    I am afraid—yet 'Luria' seems to have done no harm this time, as you
    are singularly well the day after so much writing. Yet do not hurry
    that last act.... I won't have it for a long while yet.


    Here I have been reading Carlyle upon Cromwell and he is very fine,
    very much himself, it seems to me, everywhere. Did Mr. Kenyon make you
    understand that I had said there was nothing in him but manner ... I
    thought he said so—and I am confident that he never heard such an
    opinion from me, for good or for evil, ever at all. I may have
    observed upon those vulgar attacks on account of the so-called
    mannerism, the obvious fact, that an individuality, carried into the
    medium, the expression, is a feature in all men of genius, as Buffon
    teaches ... 'Le style, c'est l'homme.' But if the whole man were
    style, if all Carlyleism were manner—why there would be no man, no
    Carlyle worth talking of. I wonder that Mr. Kenyon should misrepresent
    me so. Euphuisms there may be to the end of the world—affected
    parlances—just as a fop at heart may go without shoestrings to mimic
    the distractions of some great wandering soul—although that is a
    bad comparison, seeing that what is called Carlyle's mannerism, is not
    his dress, but his physiognomy—or more than that even.


    But I do not forgive him for talking here against the 'ideals of
    poets' ... opposing their ideal by a mis-called reality, which is
    another sort, a baser sort, of ideal after all. He sees things in
    broad blazing lights—but he does not analyse them like a
    philosopher—do you think so? Then his praise for dumb heroic action
    as opposed to speech and singing, what is that—when all earnest
    thought, passion, belief, and their utterances, are as much actions
    surely as the cutting off of fifty heads by one right hand. As if
    Shakespeare's actions were not greater than Cromwell's!—


    But I shall write no more. Once more, may God bless you.

Wholly and only
Your Ba.


