
Tuesday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 4, 1846.]


    You ought hardly,—ought you, my Ba?—to refer to that letter or any
    expression in it; I had—and have, I trust—your forgiveness for
    what I wrote, meaning to be generous or at least just, God knows.
    That, and the other like exaggerations were there to serve the purpose
    of what you properly call a crisis. I did believe,—taking an
    expression, in the note that occasioned mine, in connection with an
    excuse which came in the postscript for not seeing me on the day
    previously appointed, I did fully believe that you were about to deny
    me admittance again unless I blotted out—not merely softened
    down—the past avowal. All was wrong, foolish, but from a good notion,
    I dare to say. And then, that particular exaggeration you bring most
    painfully to my mind—that does not, after all, disagree with what I
    said and you repeat—does it, if you will think? I said my other
    'likings' (as you rightly set it down) used to 'come and go,' and
    that my love for you did not, and that is true; the first clause as
    the last of the sentence, for my sympathies are very wide and
    general,—always have been—and the natural problem has been the
    giving unity to their object, concentrating them instead of
    dispersing. I seem to have foretold, foreknown you in other likings
    of mine—now here ... when the liking 'came' ... and now elsewhere
    ... when as surely the liking 'went': and if they had stayed before
    the time would that have been a comfort to refer to? On the contrary,
    I am as little likely to be led by delusions as can be,—for Romeo
    thinks he loves Rosaline, and is excused on all hands—whereas I saw
    the plain truth without one mistake, and 'looked to like, if looking
    liking moved—and no more deep did I endart mine eye'—about which,
    first I was very sorry, and after rather proud—all which I seem to
    have told you before.—And now, when my whole heart and soul find you,
    and fall on you, and fix forever, I am to be dreadfully afraid the joy
    cannot last, seeing that


    —it is so baseless a fear that no illustration will serve! Is it gone
    now, dearest, ever-dearest?


    And as you amuse me sometimes, as now, by seeming surprised at some
    chance expression of a truth which is grown a veriest commonplace to
    me—like Charles Lamb's 'letter to an elderly man whose education
    had been neglected'—when he finds himself involuntarily communicating
    truths above the capacity and acquirements of his friend, and stops
    himself after this fashion—'If you look round the world, my dear
    Sir—for it is round!—so I will make you laugh at me, if you will,
    for my inordinate delight at hearing the success of your experiment
    with the opium. I never dared, nor shall dare inquire into your use of
    that—for, knowing you utterly as I do, I know you only bend to the
    most absolute necessity in taking more or less of it—so that increase
    of the quantity must mean simply increased weakness, illness—and
    diminution, diminished illness. And now there is diminution! Dear,
    dear Ba—you speak of my silly head and its ailments ... well, and
    what brings on the irritation? A wet day or two spent at home; and
    what ends it all directly?—just an hour's walk! So with me:
    now,—fancy me shut in a room for seven years ... it is—no, don't
    see, even in fancy, what is left of me then! But you, at the end;
    this is all the harm: I wonder ... I confirm my soul in its belief
    in perpetual miraculousness ... I bless God with my whole heart that
    it is thus with you! And so, I will not even venture to say—so
    superfluous it were, though with my most earnest, most loving breath
    (I who do love you more at every breath I draw; indeed, yes
    dearest,)—I will not bid you—that is, pray you—to persevere! You
    have all my life bound to yours—save me from my 'seven years'—and
    God reward you!

Your own R.


