
[Post-mark, February 5, 1846.]


    But I did not—dear, dearest—no indeed, I did not mean any harm about
    the letter. I wanted to show you how you had given me pleasure—and
    so,—did I give you pain? was that my ingenuity? Forgive my
    unhappiness in it, and let it be as if it had not been. Only I will
    just say that what made me talk about 'the thorn in the flesh' from
    that letter so long, was a sort of conviction of your having put into
    it as much of the truth, your truth, as admitted of the ultimate
    purpose of it, and not the least, slightest doubt of the key you gave
    me to the purpose in question. And so forgive me. Why did you set
    about explaining, as if I were doubting you? When you said once that
    it 'did not come and go,'—was it not enough? enough to make me feel
    happy as I told you? Did I require you to write a letter like this?
    Now think for a moment, and know once for all, how from the beginning
    to these latter days and through all possible degrees of crisis, you
    have been to my apprehension and gratitude, the best, most consistent,
    most noble ... the words falter that would speak of it all. In nothing
    and at no moment have you—I will not say—failed to me, but spoken
    or acted unworthily of yourself at the highest. What have you ever
    been to me except too generous? Ah—if I had been only half as
    generous, it is true that I never could have seen you again after that
    first meeting—it was the straight path perhaps. But I had not
    courage—I shrank from the thought of it—and then ... besides ... I
    could not believe that your mistake was likely to last,—I concluded
    that I might keep my friend.


    Why should any remembrance be painful to you? I do not understand.
    Unless indeed I should grow painful to you ... I myself!—seeing that
    every remembered separate thing has brought me nearer to you, and made
    me yours with a deeper trust and love.


    And for that letter ... do you fancy that in my memory the sting is
    not gone from it?—and that I do not carry the thought of it, as the
    Roman maidens, you speak of, their cool harmless snakes, at my heart
    always? So let the poor letter be forgiven, for the sake of the dear
    letter that was burnt, forgiven by you—until you grow angry with me
    instead—just till then.


    And that you should care so much about the opium! Then I must care,
    and get to do with less—at least. On the other side of your goodness
    and indulgence (a very little way on the other side) it might strike
    you as strange that I who have had no pain—no acute suffering to keep
    down from its angles—should need opium in any shape. But I have had
    restlessness till it made me almost mad: at one time I lost the power
    of sleeping quite—and even in the day, the continual aching sense of
    weakness has been intolerable—besides palpitation—as if one's life,
    instead of giving movement to the body, were imprisoned undiminished
    within it, and beating and fluttering impotently to get out, at all
    the doors and windows. So the medical people gave me opium—a
    preparation of it, called morphine, and ether—and ever since I have
    been calling it my amreeta draught, my elixir,—because the
    tranquillizing power has been wonderful. Such a nervous system I
    have—so irritable naturally, and so shattered by various causes, that
    the need has continued in a degree until now, and it would be
    dangerous to leave off the calming remedy, Mr. Jago says, except very
    slowly and gradually. But slowly and gradually something may be
    done—and you are to understand that I never increased upon the
    prescribed quantity ... prescribed in the first instance—no! Now
    think of my writing all this to you!—


    And after all the lotus-eaters are blessed beyond the opium-eaters;
    and the best of lotuses are such thoughts as I know.


    Dear Miss Mitford comes to-morrow, and I am not glad enough. Shall I
    have a letter to make me glad? She will talk, talk, talk ... and I
    shall be hoping all day that not a word may be talked of ... you:—a
    forlorn hope indeed! There's a hope for a day like Thursday which is
    just in the middle between a Tuesday and a Saturday!


    Your head ... is it ... how is it? tell me. And consider again if it
    could be possible that I could ever desire to reproach you ... in
    what I said about the letter.


    May God bless you, best and dearest. If you are the compensation
    blessed is the evil that fell upon me: and that, I can say before
    God.

Your Ba.


