
Friday.
[Post-mark, February 6, 1846.]


    If I said you 'gave me pain' in anything, it was in the only way ever
    possible for you, my dearest—by giving yourself, in me, pain—being
    unjust to your own right and power as I feel them at my heart: and in
    that way, I see you will go on to the end, I getting called—in this
    very letter—'generous' &c. Well, let me fancy you see very, very deep
    into future chances and how I should behave on occasion. I shall
    hardly imitate you, I whose sense of the present and its claims of
    gratitude already is beyond expression.


    All the kind explaining about the opium makes me happier. 'Slowly and
    gradually' what may not be done? Then see the bright weather while I
    write—lilacs, hawthorn, plum-trees all in bud; elders in leaf,
    rose-bushes with great red shoots; thrushes, whitethroats, hedge
    sparrows in full song—there can, let us hope, be nothing worse in
    store than a sharp wind, a week of it perhaps—and then comes what
    shall come—


    And Miss Mitford yesterday—and has she fresh fears for you of my evil
    influence and Origenic power of 'raying out darkness' like a swart
    star? Why, the common sense of the world teaches that there is nothing
    people at fault in any faculty of expression are so intolerant of as
    the like infirmity in others—whether they are unconscious of, or
    indulgent to their own obscurity and fettered organ, the hindrance
    from the fettering of their neighbours' is redoubled. A man may think
    he is not deaf, or, at least, that you need not be so much annoyed by
    his deafness as you profess—but he will be quite aware, to say the
    least of it, when another man can't hear him; he will certainly not
    encourage him to stop his ears. And so with the converse; a writer who
    fails to make himself understood, as presumably in my case, may either
    believe in his heart that it is not so ... that only as much
    attention and previous instructedness as the case calls for, would
    quite avail to understand him; or he may open his eyes to the fact and
    be trying hard to overcome it: but on which supposition is he led to
    confirm another in his unintelligibility? By the proverbial tenderness
    of the eye with the mote for the eye with the beam? If that beam were
    just such another mote—then one might sympathize and feel no such
    inconvenience—but, because I have written a 'Sordello,' do I turn to
    just its double, Sordello the second, in your books, and so perforce
    see nothing wrong? 'No'—it is supposed—'but something as obscure
    in its way.' Then down goes the bond of union at once, and I stand no
    nearer to view your work than the veriest proprietor of one thought
    and the two words that express it without obscurity at all—'bricks
    and mortar.' Of course an artist's whole problem must be, as Carlyle
    wrote to me, 'the expressing with articulate clearness the thought in
    him'—I am almost inclined to say that clear expression should be
    his only work and care—for he is born, ordained, such as he is—and
    not born learned in putting what was born in him into words—what ever
    can be clearly spoken, ought to be. But 'bricks and mortar' is very
    easily said—and some of the thoughts in 'Sordello' not so readily
    even if Miss Mitford were to try her hand on them.


    I look forward to a real life's work for us both. I shall do
    all,—under your eyes and with your hand in mine,—all I was intended
    to do: may but you as surely go perfecting—by continuing—the work
    begun so wonderfully—'a rose-tree that beareth seven-times seven'—


    I am forced to dine in town to-day with an old friend—'to-morrow'
    always begins half the day before, like a Jewish sabbath. Did your
    sister tell you that I met her on the stairs last time? She did not
    tell you that I had almost passed by her—the eyes being still
    elsewhere and occupied. Now let me write out that—no—I will send the
    old ballad I told you of, for the strange coincidence—and it is very
    charming beside, is it not? Now goodbye, my sweetest, dearest—and
    tell me good news of yourself to-morrow, and be but half a quarter as
    glad to see me as I shall be blessed in seeing you. God bless you
    ever.

Your own

R.


