
Saturday.
[Post-mark, February 7, 1846.]


    I felt it must be so ... that something must be the matter, ... and I
    had been so really unhappy for half an hour, that your letter which
    comes now at four, seems a little better, with all its bad news, than
    my fancies took upon themselves to be, without instruction. Now was
    it right to go out yesterday when you were unwell, and to a great
    dinner?—but I shall not reproach you, dearest, dearest—I have no
    heart for it at this moment. As to Monday, of course it is as you like
    ... if you are well enough on Monday ... if it should be thought wise
    of you to come to London through the noise ... if ... you understand
    all the ifs ... and among them the greatest if of all, ... for if
    you do love me ... care for me even, you will not do yourself harm
    or run any risk of harm by going out anywhere too soon. On Monday,
    in case you are considered well enough, and otherwise Tuesday,
    Wednesday—I leave it to you. Still I will ask one thing, whether
    you come on Monday or not. Let me have a single line by the nearest
    post to say how you are. Perhaps for to-night it is not possible—oh
    no, it is nearly five now! but a word written on Sunday would be with
    me early on Monday morning, and I know you will let me have it, to
    save some of the anxious thoughts ... to break them in their course
    with some sort of certainty! May God bless you dearest of all!—I
    thought of you on Thursday, but did not speak of you, not even when
    Miss Mitford called Hood the greatest poet of the age ... she had been
    depreciating Carlyle, so I let you lie and wait on the same level, ...
    that shelf of the rock which is above tide mark! I was glad even, that
    she did not speak of you; and, under cover of her speech of others, I
    had my thoughts of you deeply and safely. When she had gone at half
    past six, moreover, I grew over-hopeful, and made up my fancy to have
    a letter at eight! The branch she had pulled down, sprang upward
    skyward ... to that high possibility of a letter! Which did not come
    that day ... no!—and I revenged myself by writing a letter to you,
    which was burnt afterwards because I would not torment you for
    letters. Last night, came a real one—dearest! So we could not keep
    our sabbath to-day! It is a fast day instead, ... on my part. How
    should I feel (I have been thinking to myself), if I did not see you
    on Saturday, and could not hope to see you on Monday, nor on Tuesday,
    nor on Wednesday, nor Thursday nor Friday, nor Saturday again—if all
    the sabbaths were gone out of the world for me! May God bless you!—it
    has grown to be enough prayer!—as you are enough (and all, besides)
    for

Your own
Ba.


