
Tuesday.
[Post-mark, February 10, 1846.]


    Ever dearest, I have been possessed by your 'Luria' just as you would
    have me, and I should like you to understand, not simply how fine a
    conception the whole work seems to me, so developed, but how it has
    moved and affected me, without the ordinary means and dialect of
    pathos, by that calm attitude of moral grandeur which it has—it is
    very fine. For the execution, that too is worthily done—although I
    agree with you, that a little quickening and drawing in closer here
    and there, especially towards the close where there is no time to
    lose, the reader feels, would make the effect stronger—but you will
    look to it yourself—and such a conception must come in thunder and
    lightning, as a chief god would—must make its own way ... and will
    not let its poet go until he speaks it out to the ultimate syllable.
    Domizia disappoints me rather. You might throw a flash more of light
    on her face—might you not? But what am I talking? I think it a
    magnificent work—a noble exposition of the ingratitude of men against
    their 'heroes,' and (what is peculiar) an humane exposition ... not
    misanthropical, after the usual fashion of such things: for the
    return, the remorse, saves it—and the 'Too late' of the repentance
    and compensation covers with its solemn toll the fate of persecutors
    and victim. We feel that Husain himself could only say afterward ...
    'That is done.' And now—surely you think well of the work as a
    whole? You cannot doubt, I fancy, of the grandeur of it—and of the
    subtilty too, for it is subtle—too subtle perhaps for stage
    purposes, though as clear, ... as to expression ... as to medium ...
    as 'bricks and mortar' ... shall I say?

'A people is but the attempt of many
To rise to the completer life of one.'

There is one of the fine thoughts. And how fine he is, your Luria,
    when he looks back to his East, through the half-pardon and
    half-disdain of Domizia. Ah—Domizia! would it hurt her to make her
    more a woman ... a little ... I wonder!


    So I shall begin from the beginning, from the first act, and read
    through ... since I have read the fifth twice over. And remember,
    please, that I am to read, besides, the 'Soul's Tragedy,' and that I
    shall dun you for it presently. Because you told me it was finished,
    otherwise I would not speak a word, feeling that you want rest, and
    that I, who am anxious about you, would be crossing my own purposes
    by driving you into work. It is the overwork, the overwear of mind and
    heart (for the feelings come as much into use as the thoughts in these
    productions), that makes you so pale, dearest, that distracts your
    head, and does all the harm on Saturdays and so many other days
    besides.


    To-day—how are you? It was right and just for me to write this
    time, after the two dear notes ... the one on Saturday night which
    made me praise you to myself and think you kinder than kindest, and
    the other on Monday morning which took me unaware—such a note, that
    was! Oh it was right and just that I should not teaze you to send me
    another after those two others,—yet I was very near doing it—yet I
    should like infinitely to hear to-day how you
    are—unreasonable!—Well! you will write now—you will answer what I
    am writing, and mention yourself particularly and sincerely—Remember!
    Above all, you will care for your head. I have been thinking since
    yesterday that, coming out of the cold, you might not have refused as
    usual to take something ... hot wine and water, or coffee? Will you
    have coffee with me on Saturday? 'Shunning the salt,' will you have
    the sugar? And do tell me, for I have been thinking, are you careful
    as to diet—and will such sublunary things as coffee and tea and cocoa
    affect your head—for or against! Then you do not touch wine—and
    perhaps you ought. Surely something may be found or done to do you
    good. If it had not been for me, you would be travelling in Italy by
    this time and quite well perhaps.


    This morning I had a letter from Miss Martineau and really read it to
    the end without thinking it too long, which is extraordinary for me
    just now, and scarcely ordinary in the letter, and indeed it is a
    delightful letter, as letters go, which are not yours! You shall take
    it with you on Saturday to read, and you shall see that it is worth
    reading, and interesting for Wordsworth's sake and her own. Mr.
    Kenyon has it now, because he presses on to have her letters, and I
    should not like to tell him that you had it first from me.... Also
    Saturday will be time enough.


    Oh—poor Mr. Horne! shall I tell you some of his offences? That he
    desires to be called at four in the morning, and does not get up till
    eight. That he pours libations on his bare head out of the
    water-glasses at great dinners. That being in the midst of
    sportsmen—rural aristocrats—lords of soil—and all talking learnedly
    of pointers' noses and spaniels' ears; he has exclaimed aloud in a
    mocking paraphrase—'If I were to hold up a horse by the tail.' The
    wit is certainly doubtful!—That being asked to dinner on Tuesday, he
    will go on Wednesday instead.—That he throws himself at full length
    with a gesture approaching to a 'summerset' on satin sofas. That he
    giggles. That he only thinks he can talk. That his ignorance on all
    subjects is astounding. That he never read the old ballads, nor saw
    Percy's collection. That he asked who wrote 'Drink to me only with
    thine eyes.' That after making himself ridiculous in attempting to
    speak at a public meeting, he said to a compassionate friend 'I got
    very well out of that.' That, in writing his work on Napoleon, he
    employed a man to study the subject for him. That he cares for
    nobody's poetry or fame except his own, and considers Tennyson chiefly
    illustrious as being his contemporary. That, as to politics, he
    doesn't care 'which side.' That he is always talking of 'my shares,'
    'my income,' as if he were a Kilmansegg. Lastly (and understand, this
    is my 'lastly' and not Miss Mitford's, who is far from being out of
    breath so soon) that he has a mania for heiresses—that he has gone
    out at half past five and 'proposed' to Miss M or N with fifty
    thousand pounds, and being rejected (as the lady thought fit to report
    herself) came back to tea and the same evening 'fell in love' with
    Miss O or P ... with forty thousand—went away for a few months, and
    upon his next visit, did as much to a Miss Q or W, on the promise of
    four blood horses—has a prospect now of a Miss R or S—with hounds,
    perhaps.


    Too, too bad—isn't it? I would repeat none of it except to you—and
    as to the worst part, the last, why some may be coincidence, and some,
    exaggeration, for I have not the least doubt that every now and then a
    fine poetical compliment was turned into a serious thing by the
    listener, and then the poor poet had critics as well as listeners all
    round him. Also, he rather 'wears his heart on his sleeve,' there is
    no denying—and in other respects he is not much better, perhaps, than
    other men. But for the base traffic of the affair—I do not believe a
    word. He is too generous—has too much real sensibility. I fought his
    battle, poor Orion. 'And so,' she said 'you believe it possible for a
    disinterested man to become really attached to two women, heiresses,
    on the same day?' I doubted the fact. And then she showed me a note,
    an autograph note from the poet, confessing the M or N part of the
    business—while Miss O or P confessed herself, said Miss Mitford. But
    I persisted in doubting, notwithstanding the lady's confessions, or
    convictions, as they might be. And just think of Mr. Horne not having
    tact enough to keep out of these multitudinous scrapes, for those few
    days which on three separate occasions he paid Miss Mitford in a
    neighbourhood where all were strangers to him,—and never outstaying
    his week! He must have been foolish, read it all how we may.


    And so am I, to write this 'personal talk' to you when you will not
    care for it—yet you asked me, and it may make you smile, though
    Wordsworth's tea-kettle outsings it all.


    When your Monday letter came, I was reading the criticism on Hunt and
    his Italian poets, in the Examiner. How I liked to be pulled by the
    sleeve to your translations!—How I liked everything!—Pulci, Pietro
    ... and you, best!


    Yet here's a naiveté which I found in your letter! I will write it out
    that you may read it—


    'However it' (the headache) 'was no sooner gone in a degree, than a
    worse plague came—I sate thinking of you.'


    Very satisfactory that is, and very clear.


    May God bless you dearest, dearest! Be careful of yourself. The cold
    makes me languid, as heat is apt to make everybody; but I am not
    unwell, and keep up the fire and the thoughts of you.

Your worse ... worst plague
Your own
Ba.


    I shall hear? yes! And admire my obedience in having written 'a long
    letter' to the letter!


