
Wednesday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 11, 1846.]


    My sweetest 'plague,' did I really write that sentence so, without
    gloss or comment in close vicinity? I can hardly think it—but you
    know well, well where the real plague lay,—that I thought of you as
    thinking, in your infinite goodness, of untoward chances which had
    kept me from you—and if I did not dwell more particularly on that
    thinking of yours, which became as I say, in the knowledge of it, a
    plague when brought before me with the thought of you,—if I passed
    this slightly over it was for pure unaffected shame that I should take
    up the care and stop the 'reverie serene' of—ah, the rhyme lets me
    say—'sweetest eyes were ever seen'—were ever seen! And yourself
    confess, in the Saturday's note, to having been 'unhappy for half an
    hour till' &c. &c.—and do not I feel that here, and am not I
    plagued by it?


    Well, having begun at the end of your letter, dearest, I will go back
    gently (that is backwards) and tell you I 'sate thinking' too, and
    with no greater comfort, on the cold yesterday. The pond before the
    window was frozen ('so as to bear sparrows' somebody said) and I knew
    you would feel it—'but you are not unwell'—really? thank God—and
    the month wears on. Beside I have got a reassurance—you asked me once
    if I were superstitious, I remember (as what do I forget that you
    say?). However that may be, yesterday morning as I turned to look for
    a book, an old fancy seized me to try the 'sortes' and dip into the
    first page of the first I chanced upon, for my fortune; I said 'what
    will be the event of my love for Her'—in so many words—and my book
    turned out to be—'Cerutti's Italian Grammar!'—a propitious source of
    information ... the best to be hoped, what could it prove but some
    assurance that you were in the Dative Case, or I, not in the ablative
    absolute? I do protest that, with the knowledge of so many horrible
    pitfalls, or rather spring guns with wires on every bush ... such
    dreadful possibilities of stumbling on 'conditional moods,' 'imperfect
    tenses,' 'singular numbers,'—I should have been too glad to put up
    with the safe spot for the sole of my foot though no larger than
    afforded by such a word as 'Conjunction,' 'possessive pronoun—,'
    secure so far from poor Tippet's catastrophe. Well, I ventured, and
    what did I find? This—which I copy from the book now—'If we love
    in the other world as we do in this, I shall love thee to
    eternity'—from 'Promiscuous Exercises,' to be translated into
    Italian, at the end.


    And now I reach Horne and his characteristics—of which I can tell you
    with confidence that they are grossly misrepresented where not
    altogether false—whether it proceed from inability to see what one
    may see, or disinclination, I cannot say. I know very little of Horne,
    but my one visit to him a few weeks ago would show the uncandidness of
    those charges: for instance, he talked a good deal about horses,
    meaning to ride in Ireland, and described very cleverly an old hunter
    he had hired once,—how it galloped and could not walk; also he
    propounded a theory of the true method of behaving in the saddle when
    a horse rears, which I besought him only to practise in fancy on the
    sofa, where he lay telling it. So much for professing his ignorance in
    that matter! On a sofa he does throw himself—but when thrown there,
    he can talk, with Miss Mitford's leave, admirably,—I never heard
    better stories than Horne's—some Spanish-American incidents of travel
    want printing—or have been printed, for aught I know. That he cares
    for nobody's poetry is false, he praises more unregardingly of his
    own retreat, more unprovidingly for his own fortune,—(do I speak
    clearly?)—less like a man who himself has written somewhat in the
    'line' of the other man he is praising—which 'somewhat' has to be
    guarded in its interests, &c., less like the poor professional praise
    of the 'craft' than any other I ever met—instance after instance
    starting into my mind as I write. To his income I never heard him
    allude—unless one should so interpret a remark to me this last time
    we met, that he had been on some occasion put to inconvenience by
    somebody's withholding ten or twelve pounds due to him for an article,
    and promised in the confidence of getting them to a tradesman, which
    does not look like 'boasting of his income'! As for the heiresses—I
    don't believe one word of it, of the succession and transition and
    trafficking. Altogether, what miserable 'set-offs' to the achievement
    of an 'Orion,' a 'Marlowe,' a 'Delora'! Miss Martineau understands him
    better.


    Now I come to myself and my health. I am quite well now—at all
    events, much better, just a little turning in the head—since you
    appeal to my sincerity. For the coffee—thank you, indeed thank you,
    but nothing after the 'oenomel' and before half past six. I know
    all about that song and its Greek original if Horne does not—and can
    tell you—, how truly...!

The thirst that from the soul doth rise
    
Doth ask a drink divine—
But might I of Jove's nectar sup
    
I would not change for thine! No, no, no!

And by the bye, I have misled you as my wont is, on the subject of
    wine, 'that I do not touch it'—not habitually, nor so as to feel the
    loss of it, that on a principle; but every now and then of course.


    And now, 'Luria', so long as the parts cohere and the whole is
    discernible, all will be well yet. I shall not look at it, nor think
    of it, for a week or two, and then see what I have forgotten. Domizia
    is all wrong; I told you I knew that her special colour had faded,—it
    was but a bright line, and the more distinctly deep that it was so
    narrow. One of my half dozen words on my scrap of paper 'pro memoria'
    was, under the 'Act V.' 'she loves'—to which I could not bring it,
    you see! Yet the play requires it still,—something may yet be
    effected, though.... I meant that she should propose to go to Pisa
    with him, and begin a new life. But there is no hurry—I suppose it is
    no use publishing much before Easter—I will try and remember what my
    whole character did mean—it was, in two words, understood at the
    time by 'panther's-beauty'—on which hint I ought to have spoken! But
    the work grew cold, and you came between, and the sun put out the fire
    on the hearth nec vult panthera domari!


    For the 'Soul's Tragedy'—that will surprise you, I think. There is
    no trace of you there,—you have not put out the black face of
    it—it is all sneering and disillusion—and shall not be printed
    but burned if you say the word—now wait and see and then say! I will
    bring the first of the two parts next Saturday.


    And now, dearest, I am with you—and the other matters are forgotten
    already. God bless you, I am ever your own R. You will write to me I
    trust? And tell me how to bear the cold.


