
[Post-mark, February 12, 1846.]


    Ah, the 'sortes'! Is it a double oracle—'swan and shadow'—do you
    think? or do my eyes see double, dazzled by the light of it? 'I shall
    love thee to eternity'—I shall.


    And as for the wine, I did not indeed misunderstand you 'as my wont
    is,' because I understood simply that 'habitually' you abstained from
    wine, and I meant exactly that perhaps it would be better for your
    health to take it habitually. It might, you know—not that I pretend
    to advise. Only when you look so much too pale sometimes, it comes
    into one's thoughts that you ought not to live on cresses and cold
    water. Strong coffee, which is the nearest to a stimulant that I dare
    to take, as far as ordinary diet goes, will almost always deliver me
    from the worst of headaches, but there is no likeness, no comparison.
    And your 'quite well' means that dreadful 'turning' still ... still!
    Now do not think any more of the Domizias, nor 'try to remember,'
    which is the most wearing way of thinking. The more I read and read
    your 'Luria,' the grander it looks, and it will make its own road with
    all understanding men, you need not doubt, and still less need you try
    to make me uneasy about the harm I have done in 'coming between,' and
    all the rest of it. I wish never to do you greater harm than just
    that, and then with a white conscience 'I shall love thee to
    eternity!... dearest! You have made a golden work out of your
    'golden-hearted Luria'—as once you called him to me, and I hold it in
    the highest admiration—should, if you were precisely nothing to me.
    And still, the fifth act rises! That is certain. Nevertheless I seem
    to agree with you that your hand has vacillated in your Domizia. We do
    not know her with as full a light on her face, as the other
    persons—we do not see the panther,—no, certainly we do not—but
    you will do a very little for her which will be everything, after a
    time ... and I assure you that if you were to ask for the manuscript
    before, you should not have a page of it—now, you are only to rest.
    What a work to rest upon! Do consider what a triumph it is! The more I
    read, the more I think of it, the greater it grows—and as to 'faded
    lines,' you never cut a pomegranate that was redder in the deep of it.
    Also, no one can say 'This is not clearly written.' The people who are
    at 'words of one syllable' may be puzzled by you and Wordsworth
    together this time ... as far as the expression goes. Subtle thoughts
    you always must have, in and out of 'Sordello'—and the objectors
    would find even Plato (though his medium is as lucid as the water that
    ran beside the beautiful plane-tree!) a little difficult perhaps.


    To-day Mr. Kenyon came, and do you know, he has made a beatific
    confusion between last Saturday and next Saturday, and said to me he
    had told Miss Thomson to mind to come on Friday if she wished to see
    me ... 'remembering' (he added) 'that Mr. Browning took Saturday!!'
    So I let him mistake the one week for the other—'Mr. Browning took
    Saturday,' it was true, both ways. Well—and then he went on to tell
    me that he had heard from Mrs. Jameson who was at Brighton and unwell,
    and had written to say this and that to him, and to enquire
    besides—now, what do you think, she enquired besides? 'how you and
    ... Browning were' said Mr. Kenyon—I write his words. He is coming,
    perhaps to-morrow, or perhaps Sunday—Saturday is to have a twofold
    safety. That is, if you are not ill again. Dearest, you will not think
    of coming if you are ill ... unwell even. I shall not be frightened
    next time, as I told you—I shall have the precedent. Before, I had to
    think! 'It has never happened so—there must be a cause—and if it
    is a very, very, bad cause, why no one will tell me ... it will not
    seem my concern'—that was my thought on Saturday. But another
    time ... only, if it is possible to keep well, do keep well, beloved,
    and think of me instead of Domizia, and let there be no other time for
    your suffering ... my waiting is nothing. I shall remember for the
    future that you may have the headache—and do you remember it too!


    For Mr. Horne I take your testimony gladly and believingly. She
    blots with her eyes sometimes. She hates ... and loves, in extreme
    degrees. We have, once or twice or thrice, been on the border of
    mutual displeasure, on this very subject, for I grew really vexed to
    observe the trust on one side and the dyspathy on the other—using
    the mildest of words. You see, he found himself, down in Berkshire, in
    quite a strange element of society,—he, an artist in his good and his
    evil,—and the people there, 'county families,' smoothly plumed in
    their conventions, and classing the ringlets and the aboriginal way of
    using water-glasses among offences against the Moral Law. Then,
    meaning to be agreeable, or fascinating perhaps, made it twenty times
    worse. Writing in albums about the graces, discoursing meditated
    impromptus at picnics, playing on the guitar in fancy dresses,—all
    these things which seemed to poor Orion as natural as his own stars I
    dare say, and just the things suited to the genus poet, and to
    himself specifically,—were understood by the natives and their 'rural
    deities' to signify, that he intended to marry one half the county,
    and to run away with the other. But Miss Mitford should have known
    better—she should. And she would have known better, if she had
    liked him—for the liking could have been unmade by no such offences.
    She is too fervent a friend—she can be. Generous too, she can be
    without an effort; and I have had much affection from her—and accuse
    myself for seeming to have less—but—


    May God bless you!—I end in haste after this long lingering.

Your
Ba.


    Not unwell—I am not! I forgot it, which proves how I am not.


