
Saturday Evening.
[Post-mark, February 16, 1846.]


    Ever dearest, though you wanted to make me say one thing displeasing
    to you to-day, I had not courage to say two instead ... which I might
    have done indeed and indeed! For I am capable of thinking both
    thoughts of 'next year,' as you suggested them:—because while you are
    with me I see only you, and you being you, I cannot doubt a power of
    yours nor measure the deep loving nature which I feel to be so
    deep—so that there may be ever so many 'mores,' and no 'more' wonder
    of mine!—but afterwards, when the door is shut and there is no 'more'
    light nor speaking until Thursday, why then, that I do not see you
    but me,—then comes the reaction,—the natural lengthening of the
    shadows at sunset,—and then, the 'less, less, less' grows to seem
    as natural to my fate, as the 'more' seemed to your nature—I being I!


    Sunday.—Well!—you are to try to forgive it all! And the truth,
    over and under all, is, that I scarcely ever do think of the future,
    scarcely ever further than to your next visit, and almost never
    beyond, except for your sake and in reference to that view of the
    question which I have vexed you with so often, in fearing for your
    happiness. Once it was a habit of mind with me to live altogether in
    what I called the future—but the tops of the trees that looked
    towards Troy were broken off in the great winds, and falling down into
    the river beneath, where now after all this time they grow green
    again, I let them float along the current gently and pleasantly. Can
    it be better I wonder! And if it becomes worse, can I help it? Also
    the future never seemed to belong to me so little—never! It might
    appear wonderful to most persons, it is startling even to myself
    sometimes, to observe how free from anxiety I am—from the sort of
    anxiety which might be well connected with my own position here, and
    which is personal to myself. That is all thrown behind—into the
    bushes—long ago it was, and I think I told you of it before.
    Agitation comes from indecision—and I was decided from the first
    hour when I admitted the possibility of your loving me really.
    Now,—as the Euphuists used to say,—I am 'more thine than my own' ...
    it is a literal truth—and my future belongs to you; if it was mine,
    it was mine to give, and if it was mine to give, it was given, and if
    it was given ... beloved....


    So you see!


    Then I will confess to you that all my life long I have had a rather
    strange sympathy and dyspathy—the sympathy having concerned the genus
    jilt (as vulgarly called) male and female—and the dyspathy—the
    whole class of heroically virtuous persons who make sacrifices of what
    they call 'love' to what they call 'duty.' There are exceptional cases
    of course, but, for the most part, I listen incredulously or else with
    a little contempt to those latter proofs of strength—or weakness, as
    it may be:—people are not usually praised for giving up their
    religion, for unsaying their oaths, for desecrating their 'holy
    things'—while believing them still to be religious and sacramental!
    On the other side I have always and shall always understand how it is
    possible for the most earnest and faithful of men and even of women
    perhaps, to err in the convictions of the heart as well as of the
    mind, to profess an affection which is an illusion, and to recant and
    retreat loyally at the eleventh hour, on becoming aware of the truth
    which is in them. Such men are the truest of men, and the most
    courageous for the truth's sake, and instead of blaming them I hold
    them in honour, for me, and always did and shall.


    And while I write, you are 'very ill'—very ill!—how it looks,
    written down so! When you were gone yesterday and my thoughts had
    tossed about restlessly for ever so long, I was wise enough to ask
    Wilson how she thought you were looking, ... and she 'did not know'
    ... she 'had not observed' ... 'only certainly Mr. Browning ran
    up-stairs instead of walking as he did the time before.'


    Now promise me dearest, dearest—not to trifle with your health. Not
    to neglect yourself ... not to tire yourself ... and besides to take
    the advice of your medical friend as to diet and general
    treatment:—because there must be a wrong and a right in everything,
    and the right is very important under your circumstances ... if you
    have a tendency to illness. It may be right for you to have wine for
    instance. Did you ever try the putting your feet into hot water at
    night, to prevent the recurrence of the morning headache—for the
    affection of the head comes on early in the morning, does it not? just
    as if the sleeping did you harm. Now I have heard of such a remedy
    doing good—and could it increase the evil?—mustard mixed with the
    water, remember. Everything approaching to congestion is full of
    fear—I tremble to think of it—and I bring no remedy by this teazing
    neither! But you will not be 'wicked' nor 'unkind,' nor provoke the
    evil consciously—you will keep quiet and forswear the going out at
    nights, the excitement and noise of parties, and the worse excitement
    of composition—you promise. If you knew how I keep thinking of you,
    and at intervals grow so frightened! Think you, that you are three
    times as much to me as I can be to you at best and greatest,—because
    you are more than three times the larger planet—and because too, you
    have known other sources of light and happiness ... but I need not say
    this—and I shall hear on Monday, and may trust to you every day ...
    may I not? Yet I would trust my soul to you sooner than your own
    health.


    May God bless you, dear, dearest. If the first part of the 'Soul's
    Tragedy' should be written out, I can read that perhaps, without
    drawing you in to think of the second. Still it may be safer to keep
    off altogether for the present—and let it be as you incline. I do not
    speak of 'Luria.'

Your own
BA.


    If it were not for Mr. Kenyon, I should say, almost, Wednesday,
    instead of Thursday—I want to see you so much, and to see for myself
    about the looks and spirits, only it would not do if he found you here
    on Wednesday. Let him come to-morrow or on Tuesday, and Wednesday will
    be safe—shall we consider? what do you think?


