
Sunday Afternoon.
[Post-mark, February 16, 1846.]


    Here is the letter again, dearest: I suppose it gives me the same
    pleasure, in reading, as you—and Mr. K. as me, and anybody else as
    him; if all the correspondence which was claimed again and burnt on
    some principle or other some years ago be at all of the nature of this
    sample, the measure seems questionable. Burn anybody's real
    letters, well and good: they move and live—the thoughts, feelings,
    and expressions even,—in a self-imposed circle limiting the
    experience of two persons only—there is the standard, and to that
    the appeal—how should a third person know? His presence breaks the
    line, so to speak, and lets in a whole tract of country on the
    originally inclosed spot—so that its trees, which were from side to
    side there, seem left alone and wondering at their sudden unimportance
    in the broad land; while its 'ferns such as I never saw before' and
    which have been petted proportionably, look extravagant enough amid
    the new spread of good honest grey grass that is now the earth's
    general wear. So that the significance is lost at once, and whole
    value of such letters—the cypher changed, the vowel-points removed:
    but how can that affect clever writing like this? What do you, to whom
    it is addressed, see in it more than the world that wants to see it
    and shan't have it? One understands shutting an unprivileged eye to
    the ineffable mysteries of those 'upper-rooms,' now that the broom and
    dust pan, stocking-mending and gingerbread-making are invested with
    such unforeseen reverence ... but the carriage-sweep and quarry,
    together with Jane and our baskets, and a pleasant shadow of
    Wordsworth's Sunday hat preceding his own rapid strides in the
    direction of Miss Fenwick's house—surely, 'men's eyes were made to
    see, so let them gaze' at all this! And so I, gazing with a clear
    conscience, am very glad to hear so much good of a very good person
    and so well told. She plainly sees the proper use and advantage of a
    country-life; and that knowledge gets to seem a high point of
    attainment doubtless by the side of the Wordsworth she speaks of—for
    mine he shall not be as long as I am able! Was ever such a 'great'
    poet before? Put one trait with the other—the theory of rural
    innocence—alternation of 'vulgar trifles' with dissertating with
    style of 'the utmost grandeur that even you can conceive' (speak for
    yourself, Miss M.!)—and that amiable transition from two o'clock's
    grief at the death of one's brother to three o'clock's happiness in
    the 'extraordinary mesmeric discourse' of one's friend. All this, and
    the rest of the serene and happy inspired daily life which a piece of
    'unpunctuality' can ruin, and to which the guardian 'angel' brings as
    crowning qualification the knack of poking the fire adroitly—of
    this—what can one say but that—no, best hold one's tongue and read
    the 'Lyrical Ballads' with finger in ear. Did not Shelley say long ago
    'He had no more imagination than a pint-pot'—though in those days
    he used to walk about France and Flanders like a man? Now, he is
    'most comfortable in his worldly affairs' and just this comes of it!
    He lives the best twenty years of his life after the way of his own
    heart—and when one presses in to see the result of the rare
    experiment ... what the one alchemist whom fortune has allowed to
    get all his coveted materials and set to work at last in earnest with
    fire and melting-pot—what he produces after all the talk of him and
    the like of him; why, you get pulvis et cinis—a man at the mercy of
    the tongs and shovel!


    Well! Let us despair at nothing, but, wishing success to the newer
    aspirant, expect better things from Miss M. when the 'knoll,' and
    'paradise,' and their facilities, operate properly; and that she will
    make a truer estimate of the importance and responsibilities of
    'authorship' than she does at present, if I understand rightly the
    sense in which she describes her own life as it means to be; for in
    one sense it is all good and well, and quite natural that she should
    like 'that sort of strenuous handwork' better than book-making; like
    the play better than the labour, as we are apt to do. If she realises
    a very ordinary scheme of literary life, planned under the eye of God
    not 'the public,' and prosecuted under the constant sense of the
    night's coming which ends it good or bad—then, she will be sure to
    'like' the rest and sport—teaching her maids and sewing her gloves
    and making delicate visitors comfortable—so much more rational a
    resource is the worst of them than gin-and-water, for instance. But
    if, as I rather suspect, these latter are to figure as a virtual
    half duty of the whole Man—as of equal importance (on the ground of
    the innocence and utility of such occupations) with the book-making
    aforesaid—always supposing that to be of the right kind—then I
    respect Miss M. just as I should an Archbishop of Canterbury whose
    business was the teaching A.B.C. at an infant-school—he who might set
    on the Tens to instruct the Hundreds how to convince the Thousands of
    the propriety of doing that and many other things. Of course one will
    respect him only the more if when that matter is off his mind he
    relaxes at such a school instead of over a chess-board; as it will
    increase our love for Miss M. to find that making 'my good Jane (from
    Tyne-mouth)'—'happier and—I hope—wiser' is an amusement, or more,
    after the day's progress towards the 'novel for next year' which is to
    inspire thousands, beyond computation, with the ardour of making
    innumerable other Janes and delicate relatives happier and wiser—who
    knows but as many as Burns did, and does, so make happier and wiser?
    Only, his quarry and after-solace was that 'marble bowl often
    replenished with whiskey' on which Dr. Curry discourses mournfully,
    'Oh, be wiser Thou!'—and remember it was only after Lord Bacon had
    written to an end his Book—given us for ever the Art of
    Inventing—whether steam-engine or improved dust-pan—that he took on
    himself to do a little exemplary 'hand work'; got out on that cold St.
    Alban's road to stuff a fowl with snow and so keep it fresh, and got
    into his bed and died of the cold in his hands ('strenuous hand
    work'—) before the snow had time to melt. He did not begin in his
    youth by saying—'I have a horror of merely writing 'Novum Organums'
    and shall give half my energies to the stuffing fowls'!


    All this it is my amusement, of an indifferent kind, to put down
    solely on the pleasant assurance contained in that postscript, of the
    one way of never quarrelling with Miss M.—'by joining in her plan
    and practice of plain speaking'—could she but 'get people to do it!'
    Well, she gets me for a beginner: the funny thing would be to know
    what Chorley's desperate utterance amounted to! Did you ever hear of
    the plain speaking of some of the continental lottery-projectors? An
    estate on the Rhine, for instance, is to be disposed of, and the
    holder of the lucky ticket will find himself suddenly owner of a
    mediæval castle with an unlimited number of dependencies—vineyards,
    woods, pastures, and so forth—all only waiting the new master's
    arrival—while inside, all is swept and garnished (not to say,
    varnished)—the tables are spread, the wines on the board, all is
    ready for the reception but ... here 'plain speaking' becomes
    necessary—it prevents quarrels, and, could the projector get people
    to practise it as he does all would be well; so he, at least, will
    speak plainly—you hear what is provided but, he cannot, dares not
    withhold what is not—there is then, to speak plainly,—no night
    cap! You will have to bring your own night cap. The projector
    furnishes somewhat, as you hear, but not all—and now—the worst is
    heard,—will you quarrel with him? Will my own dear, dearest Ba please
    and help me here, and fancy Chorley's concessions, and tributes, and
    recognitions, and then, at the very end, the 'plain words,' to
    counterbalance all, that have been to overlook and pardon?


    Oh, my own Ba, hear my plain speech—and how this is not an
    attempt to frighten you out of your dear wish to 'hear from me'—no,
    indeed—but a whim, a caprice,—and now it is out! over, done with!
    And now I am with you again—it is to you I shall write next. Bless
    you, ever—my beloved. I am much better, indeed—and mean to be well.
    And you! But I will write—this goes for nothing—or only this, that
    I am your very own—


