
Monday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 17, 1846.]


    Méchant comme quatre! you are, and not deserving to be let see the
    famous letter—is there any grammar in that concatenation, can you
    tell me, now that you are in an arch-critical humour? And remember
    (turning back to the subject) that personally she and I are strangers
    and that therefore what she writes for me is naturally scene-painting
    to be looked at from a distance, done with a masterly hand and most
    amiable intention, but quite a different thing of course from the
    intimate revelations of heart and mind which make a living thing of a
    letter. If she had sent such to me, I should not have sent it to Mr.
    Kenyon, but then, she would not have sent it to me in any case. What
    she has sent me might be a chapter in a book and has the life proper
    to itself, and I shall not let you try it by another standard, even if
    you wished, but you don't—for I am not so bête as not to understand
    how the jest crosses the serious all the way you write. Well—and Mr.
    Kenyon wants the letter the second time, not for himself, but for Mr.
    Crabb Robinson who promises to let me have a new sonnet of
    Wordsworth's in exchange for the loan, and whom I cannot refuse
    because he is an intimate friend of Miss Martineau's and once allowed
    me to read a whole packet of letters from her to him. She does not
    object (as I have read under her hand) to her letters being shown
    about in MS., notwithstanding the anathema against all printers of the
    same (which completes the extravagance of the unreason, I think) and
    people are more anxious to see them from their presumed nearness to
    annihilation. I, for my part, value letters (to talk literature) as
    the most vital part of biography, and for any rational human being to
    put his foot on the traditions of his kind in this particular class,
    does seem to me as wonderful as possible. Who would put away one of
    those multitudinous volumes, even, which stereotype Voltaire's
    wrinkles of wit—even Voltaire? I can read book after book of such
    reading—or could! And if her principle were carried out, there would
    be an end! Death would be deader from henceforth. Also it is a wrong
    selfish principle and unworthy of her whole life and profession,
    because we should all be ready to say that if the secrets of our daily
    lives and inner souls may instruct other surviving souls, let them be
    open to men hereafter, even as they are to God now. Dust to dust, and
    soul-secrets to humanity—there are natural heirs to all these things.
    Not that I do not intimately understand the shrinking back from the
    idea of publicity on any terms—not that I would not myself destroy
    papers of mine which were sacred to me for personal reasons—but
    then I never would call this natural weakness, virtue—nor would I, as
    a teacher of the public, announce it and attempt to justify it as an
    example to other minds and acts, I hope.


    How hard you are on the mending of stockings and the rest of it! Why
    not agree with me and like that sort of homeliness and simplicity in
    combination with such large faculty as we must admit there? Lord
    Bacon did a great deal of trifling besides the stuffing of the fowl
    you mention—which I did not remember: and in fact, all the great work
    done in the world, is done just by the people who know how to
    trifle—do you not think so? When a man makes a principle of 'never
    losing a moment,' he is a lost man. Great men are eager to find an
    hour, and not to avoid losing a moment. 'What are you doing' said
    somebody once (as I heard the tradition) to the beautiful Lady Oxford
    as she sate in her open carriage on the race-ground—'Only a little
    algebra,' said she. People who do a little algebra on the race-ground
    are not likely to do much of anything with ever so many hours for
    meditation. Why, you must agree with me in all this, so I shall not be
    sententious any longer. Mending stockings is not exactly the sort of
    pastime I should choose—who do things quite as trifling without the
    utility—and even your Seigneurie peradventure.... I stop there for
    fear of growing impertinent. The argumentum ad hominem is apt to
    bring down the argumentum ad baculum, it is as well to remember in
    time.


    For Wordsworth ... you are right in a measure and by a standard—but I
    have heard such really desecrating things of him, of his selfishness,
    his love of money, his worldly cunning (rather than prudence) that I
    felt a relief and gladness in the new chronicle;—and you can
    understand how that was. Miss Mitford's doctrine is that everything
    put into the poetry, is taken out of the man and lost utterly by him.
    Her general doctrine about poets, quite amounts to that—I do not say
    it too strongly. And knowing that such opinions are held by minds not
    feeble, it is very painful (as it would be indeed in any case) to see
    them apparently justified by royal poets like Wordsworth. Ah, but I
    know an answer—I see one in my mind!


    So again for the letters. Now ought I not to know about letters, I who
    have had so many ... from chief minds too, as society goes in England
    and America? And your letters began by being first to my intellect,
    before they were first to my heart. All the letters in the world are
    not like yours ... and I would trust them for that verdict with any
    jury in Europe, if they were not so far too dear! Mr. Kenyon wanted to
    make me show him your letters—I did show him the first, and resisted
    gallantly afterwards, which made him say what vexed me at the moment,
    ... 'oh—you let me see only women's letters,'—till I observed that
    it was a breach of confidence, except in some cases, ... and that I
    should complain very much, if anyone, man or woman, acted so by
    myself. But nobody in the world writes like you—not so vitally—and
    I have a right, if you please, to praise my letters, besides the
    reason of it which is as good.


    Ah—you made me laugh about Mr. Chorley's free speaking—and, without
    the personal knowledge, I can comprehend how it could be nothing very
    ferocious ... some 'pardonnez moi, vous êtes un ange.' The amusing
    part is that by the same post which brought me the Ambleside document,
    I heard from Miss Mitford 'that it was an admirable thing of Chorley
    to have persisted in not allowing Harriet Martineau to quarrel with
    him' ... so that there are laurels on both sides, it appears.


    And I am delighted to hear from you to-day just so, though I
    reproach you in turn just so ... because you were not 'depressed' in
    writing all this and this and this which has made me laugh—you were
    not, dearest—and you call yourself better, 'much better,' which means
    a very little perhaps, but is a golden word, let me take it as I may.
    May God bless you. Wednesday seems too near (now that this is Monday
    and you are better) to be our day ... perhaps it does,—and Thursday
    is close beside it at the worst.

Dearest I am your own
Ba.


