
Monday Evening.
[In the same envelope with the preceding letter.]


    Now forgive me, dearest of all, but I must teaze you just a little,
    and entreat you, if only for the love of me, to have medical advice
    and follow it without further delay. I like to have recourse to
    these medical people quite as little as you can—but I am persuaded
    that it is necessary—that it is at least wise, for you to do so
    now, and, you see, you were 'not quite so well' again last night! So
    will you, for me? Would I not, if you wished it? And on Wednesday,
    yes, on Wednesday, come—that is, if coming on Wednesday should really
    be not bad for you, for you must do what is right and kind, and I
    doubt whether the omnibus-driving and the noises of every sort betwixt
    us, should not keep you away for a little while—I trust you to do
    what is best for both of us.


    And it is not best ... it is not good even, to talk about 'dying for
    me' ... oh, I do beseech you never to use such words. You make me feel
    as if I were choking. Also it is nonsense—because nobody puts out a
    candle for the light's sake.


    Write one line to me to-morrow—literally so little—just to say how
    you are. I know by the writing here, what is. Let me have the one
    line by the eight o'clock post to-morrow, Tuesday.


    For the rest it may be my 'goodness' or my badness, but the world
    seems to have sunk away beneath my feet and to have left only you to
    look to and hold by. Am I not to feel, then, any trembling of the
    hand? the least trembling?


    May God bless both of us—which is a double blessing for me
    notwithstanding my badness.


    I trust you about Wednesday—and if it should be wise and kind not
    to come quite so soon, we will take it out of other days and lose not
    one of them. And as for anything 'horrible' being likely to happen, do
    not think of that either,—there can be nothing horrible while you are
    not ill. So be well—try to be well—use the means and, well or ill,
    let me have the one line to-morrow ... Tuesday. I send you the foolish
    letter I wrote to-day in answer to your too long one—too long, was it
    not, as you felt? And I, the writer of the foolish one, am
    twice-foolish, and push poor 'Luria' out of sight, and refuse to
    finish my notes on him till the harm he has done shall have passed
    away. In my badness I bring false accusation, perhaps, against poor
    Luria.


    So till Wednesday—or as you shall fix otherwise.

Your
Ba.


