
Thursday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 19, 1846.]


    My sweetest, best, dearest Ba I do love you less, much less already,
    and adore you more, more by so much more as I see of you, think of
    you—I am yours just as much as those flowers; and you may pluck those
    flowers to pieces or put them in your breast; it is not because you so
    bless me now that you may not if you please one day—you will stop me
    here; but it is the truth and I live in it.


    I am quite well; indeed, this morning, noticeably well, they tell
    me, and well I mean to keep if I can.


    When I got home last evening I found this note—and I have accepted,
    that I might say I could also keep an engagement, if so minded, at
    Harley Street—thereby insinuating that other reasons may bring me
    into the neighbourhood than the reason—but I shall either not go
    there, or only for an hour at most. I also found a note headed
    'Strictly private and confidential'—so here it goes from my mouth to
    my heart—pleasantly proposing that I should start in a few days for
    St. Petersburg, as secretary to somebody going there on a 'mission of
    humanity'—grazie tante!


    Did you hear of my meeting someone at the door whom I take to have
    been one of your brothers?


    One thing vexed me in your letter—I will tell you, the praise of
    my letters. Now, one merit they have—in language mystical—that of
    having no merit. If I caught myself trying to write finely,
    graphically &c. &c., nay, if I found myself conscious of having in my
    own opinion, so written, all would be over! yes, over! I should be
    respecting you inordinately, paying a proper tribute to your genius,
    summoning the necessary collectedness,—plenty of all that! But the
    feeling with which I write to you, not knowing that it is
    writing,—with you, face and mouth and hair and eyes opposite me,
    touching me, knowing that all is as I say, and helping out the
    imperfect phrases from your own intuition—that would be gone—and
    what in its place? 'Let us eat and drink for to-morrow we write to
    Ambleside.' No, no, love, nor can it ever be so, nor should it ever be
    so if—even if, preserving all that intimate relation, with the
    carelessness, still, somehow, was obtained with no effort in the
    world, graphic writing and philosophic and what you please—for I
    will be—would be, better than my works and words with an infinite
    stock beyond what I put into convenient circulation whether in fine
    speeches fit to remember, or fine passages to quote. For the rest, I
    had meant to tell you before now, that you often put me 'in a maze'
    when you particularize letters of mine—'such an one was kind' &c. I
    know, sometimes I seem to give the matter up in despair, I take out
    paper and fall thinking on you, and bless you with my whole heart and
    then begin: 'What a fine day this is?' I distinctly remember having
    done that repeatedly—but the converse is not true by any means, that
    (when the expression may happen to fall more consentaneously to the
    mind's motion) that less is felt, oh no! But the particular thought at
    the time has not been of the insufficiency of expression, as in the
    other instance.


    Now I will leave off—to begin elsewhere—for I am always with you,
    beloved, best beloved! Now you will write? And walk much, and sleep
    more? Bless you, dearest—ever—

Your own,


