
[Post-marks, Mis-sent to Mitcham. February 19 and 20, 1846.]


    Best and kindest of all that ever were to be loved in dreams, and
    wondered at and loved out of them, you are indeed! I cannot make you
    feel how I felt that night when I knew that to save me an anxious
    thought you had come so far so late—it was almost too much to feel,
    and is too much to speak. So let it pass. You will never act so
    again, ever dearest—you shall not. If the post sins, why leave the
    sin to the post; and I will remember for the future, will be ready to
    remember, how postmen are fallible and how you live at the end of a
    lane—and not be uneasy about a silence if there should be one
    unaccounted for. For the Tuesday coming, I shall remember that
    too—who could forget it?... I put it in the niche of the wall, one
    golden lamp more of your giving, to throw light purely down to the end
    of my life—I do thank you. And the truth is, I should have been in
    a panic, had there been no letter that evening—I was frightened the
    day before, then reasoned the fears back and waited: and if there had
    been no letter after all—. But you are supernaturally good and kind.
    How can I ever 'return' as people say (as they might say in their
    ledgers) ... any of it all? How indeed can I who have not even a heart
    left of my own, to love you with?


    I quite trust to your promise in respect to the medical advice, if
    walking and rest from work do not prevent at once the recurrence of
    those sensations—it was a promise, remember. And you will tell me the
    very truth of how you are—and you will try the music, and not be
    nervous, dearest. Would not riding be good for you—consider. And
    why should you be 'alone' when your sister is in the house? How I keep
    thinking of you all day—you cannot really be alone with so many
    thoughts ... such swarms of thoughts, if you could but see them,
    drones and bees together!


    George came in from Westminster Hall after we parted yesterday and
    said that he had talked with the junior counsel of the wretched
    plaintiffs in the Ferrers case, and that the belief was in the mother
    being implicated, although not from the beginning. It was believed too
    that the miserable girl had herself taken step after step into the
    mire, involved herself gradually, the first guilt being an
    extravagance in personal expenses, which she lied and lied to account
    for in the face of her family. 'Such a respectable family,' said
    George, 'the grandfather in court looking venerable, and everyone
    indignant upon being so disgraced by her!' But for the respectability
    in the best sense, I do not quite see. That all those people should
    acquiesce in the indecency (according to every standard of English
    manners in any class of society) of thrusting the personal expenses of
    a member of their family on Lord Ferrers, she still bearing their
    name—and in those peculiar circumstances of her supposed position
    too—where is the respectability? And they are furious with her, which
    is not to be wondered at after all. Her counsel had an interview with
    her previous to the trial, to satisfy themselves of her good faith,
    and she was quite resolute and earnest, persisting in every statement.
    On the coming out of the anonymous letters, Fitzroy Kelly said to the
    juniors that if anyone could suggest a means of explanation, he would
    be eager to carry forward the case, ... but for him he saw no way of
    escaping from the fact of the guilt of their client. Not a voice could
    speak for her. So George was told. There is no ground for a
    prosecution for a conspiracy, he says, but she is open to the charge
    for forgery, of course, and to the dreadful consequences, though it
    is not considered at all likely that Lord Ferrers could wish to
    disturb her beyond the ruin she has brought on her own life.


    Think of Miss Mitford's growing quite cold about Mr. Chorley who has
    spent two days with her lately, and of her saying in a letter to me
    this morning that he is very much changed and grown to be 'a
    presumptuous coxcomb.' He has displeased her in some way—that is
    clear. What changes there are in the world.


    Should I ever change to you, do you think, ... even if you came to
    'love me less'—not that I meant to reproach you with that
    possibility. May God bless you, dear dearest. It is another miracle
    (beside the many) that I get nearer to the mountains yet still they
    seem more blue. Is not that strange?

Ever and wholly
Your Ba.


