
Thursday Evening.
[Post-mark, February 20, 1846.]


    And I offended you by praising your letters—or rather mine, if you
    please—as if I had not the right! Still, you shall not, shall not
    fancy that I meant to praise them in the way you seem to think—by
    calling them 'graphic,' 'philosophic,'—why, did I ever use such
    words? I agree with you that if I could play critic upon your letters,
    it would be an end!—but no, no ... I did not, for a moment. In what I
    said I went back to my first impressions—and they were vital
    letters, I said—which was the résumé of my thoughts upon the early
    ones you sent me, because I felt your letters to be you from the
    very first, and I began, from the beginning, to read every one several
    times over. Nobody, I felt, nobody of all these writers, did write as
    you did. Well!—and had I not a right to say that now at last, and
    was it not natural to say just that, when I was talking of other
    people's letters and how it had grown almost impossible for me to read
    them; and do I deserve to be scolded? No indeed.


    And if I had the misfortune to think now, when you say it is a fine
    day, that that is said in more music than it could be said in by
    another—where is the sin against you, I should like to ask. It is
    yourself who is the critic, I think, after all. But over all the
    brine, I hold my letters—just as Camoens did his poem. They are best
    to me—and they are best. I knew what they were, before I knew
    what you were—all of you. And I like to think that I never fancied
    anyone on a level with you, even in a letter.


    What makes you take them to be so bad, I suppose, is just feeling in
    them how near we are. You say that!—not I.


    Bad or good, you are better—yes, 'better than the works and
    words'!—though it was very shameful of you to insinuate that I talked
    of fine speeches and passages and graphical and philosophical
    sentences, as if I had proposed a publication of 'Elegant Extracts'
    from your letters. See what blasphemy one falls into through a
    beginning of light speech! It is wiser to talk of St. Petersburg; for
    all Voltaire's ... 'ne disons pas de mal de Nicolas.'


    Wiser—because you will not go. If you were going ... well!—but there
    is no danger—it would not do you good to go, I am so happy this time
    as to be able to think—and your 'mission of humanity' lies
    nearer—'strictly private and confidential'? but not in Harley
    Street—so if you go there, dearest, keep to the 'one hour' and do
    not suffer yourself to be tired and stunned in those hot rooms and
    made unwell again—it is plain that you cannot bear that sort of
    excitement. For Mr. Kenyon's note, ... it was a great temptation to
    make a day of Friday—but I resist both for Monday's sake and for
    yours, because it seems to me safer not to hurry you from one house to
    another till you are tired completely. I shall think of you so much
    the nearer for Mr. Kenyon's note—which is something gained. In the
    meanwhile you are better, which is everything, or seems so. Ever
    dearest, do you remember what it is to me that you should be better,
    and keep from being worse again—I mean, of course, try to keep from
    being worse—be wise ... and do not stay long in those hot Harley
    Street rooms. Ah—now you will think that I am afraid of the
    unicorns!—


    Through your being ill the other day I forgot, and afterwards went on
    forgetting, to speak of and to return the ballad—which is delightful;
    I have an unspeakable delight in those suggestive ballads, which seem
    to make you touch with the end of your finger the full warm life of
    other times ... so near they bring you, yet so suddenly all passes in
    them. Certainly there is a likeness to your Duchess—it is a curious
    crossing. And does it not strike you that a verse or two must be
    wanting in the ballad—there is a gap, I fancy.


    Tell Mr. Kenyon (if he enquires) that you come here on Monday instead
    of Saturday—and if you can help it, do not mention Wednesday—it will
    be as well, not. You met Alfred at the door—he came up to me
    afterwards and observed that 'at last he had seen you!' 'Virgilium
    tantum vidi!'


    As to the thing which you try to say in the first page of this letter,
    and which you 'stop' yourself in saying ... I need not stop you in
    it....


    And now there is no time, if I am to sleep to-night. May God bless
    you, dearest, dearest.


    I must be your own while He blesses me.


