
Friday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 21, 1846.]


    As my sisters did not dine at home yesterday and I see nobody else in
    the evening, I never heard till just now and from Papa himself, that
    'George was invited to meet Mr. Browning and Mr. Procter.' How
    surprised you will be. It must have been a sudden thought of Mr.
    Kenyon's.


    And I have been thinking, thinking since last night that I wrote you
    then a letter all but ... insolent ... which, do you know, I feel half
    ashamed to look back upon this morning—particularly what I wrote
    about 'missions of humanity'—now was it not insolent of me to write
    so? If I could take my letter again I would dip it into Lethe between
    the lilies, instead of the post office:—but I can't—so if you
    wondered, you must forget as far as possible, and understand how it
    was, and that I was in brimming spirits when I wrote, from two causes
    ... first, because I had your letter which was a pure goodness of
    yours, and secondly because you were 'noticeably' better you said, or
    'noticeably well' rather, to mind my quotations. So I wrote what I
    wrote, and gave it to Arabel when she came in at midnight, to give it
    to Henrietta who goes out before eight in the morning and often takes
    charge of my letters, and it was too late, at the earliest this
    morning, to feel a little ashamed. Miss Thomson told me that she had
    determined to change the type of the few pages of her letterpress
    which had been touched, and that therefore Mr. Burges's revisions of
    my translations should be revised back again. She appears to be a very
    acute person, full of quick perceptions—naturally quick, and
    carefully trained—a little over anxious perhaps about mental lights,
    and opening her eyes still more than she sees, which is a common fault
    of clever people, if one must call it a fault. I like her, and she is
    kind and cordial. Will she ask you to help her book with a translation
    or two, I wonder. Perhaps—if the courage should come. Dearest, how I
    shall think of you this evening, and how near you will seem, not to be
    here. I had a letter from Mr. Mathews the other day, and smiled to
    read in it just what I had expected, that he immediately sent Landor's
    verses on you to a few editors, friends of his, in order to their
    communication to the public. He received my apology for myself with
    the utmost graciousness. A kind good man he is.


    After all, do you know, I am a little vexed that I should have even
    seemed to do wrong in my speech about the letters. It must have been
    wrong, if it seemed so to you, I fancy now. Only I really did no more
    mean to try your letters ... mine ... such as they are to me now, by
    the common critical measure, than the shepherds praised the pure tenor
    of the angels who sang 'Peace upon earth' to them. It was enough that
    they knew it for angels' singing. So do you forgive me, beloved, and
    put away from you the thought that I have let in between us any
    miserable stuff 'de métier,' which I hate as you hate. And I will not
    say any more about it, not to run into more imprudences of mischief.


    On the other hand I warn you against saying again what you began to
    say yesterday and stopped. Do not try it again. What may be quite good
    sense from me, is from you very much the reverse, and pray observe
    that difference. Or did you think that I was making my own road clear
    in the the thing I said about—'jilts'? No, you did not. Yet I am
    ready to repeat of myself as of others, that if I ceased to love you,
    I certainly would act out the whole consequence—but that is an
    impossible 'if' to my nature, supposing the conditions of it otherwise
    to be probable. I never loved anyone much and ceased to love that
    person. Ask every friend of mine, if I am given to change even in
    friendship! And to you...! Ah, but you never think of such a thing
    seriously—and you are conscious that you did not say it very sagely.
    You and I are in different positions. Now let me tell you an apologue
    in exchange for your Wednesday's stories which I liked so, and mine
    perhaps may make you 'a little wiser'—who knows?


    It befell that there stood in hall a bold baron, and out he spake to
    one of his serfs ... 'Come thou; and take this baton of my baronie,
    and give me instead thereof that sprig of hawthorn thou holdest in
    thine hand.' Now the hawthorn-bough was no larger a thing than might
    be carried by a wood-pigeon to the nest, when she flieth low, and the
    baronial baton was covered with fine gold, and the serf, turning it
    in his hands, marvelled greatly.


    And he answered and said, 'Let not my lord be in haste, nor jest with
    his servant. Is it verily his will that I should keep his golden
    baton? Let him speak again—lest it repent him of his gift.'


    And the baron spake again that it was his will. 'And I'—he said once
    again—'shall it be lawful for me to keep this sprig of hawthorn, and
    will it not repent thee of thy gift?'


    Then all the servants who stood in hall, laughed, and the serf's hands
    trembled till they dropped the baton into the rushes, knowing that his
    lord did but jest....


    Which mine did not. Only, de te fabula narratur up to a point.


    And I have your letter. 'What did I expect?' Why I expected just
    that, a letter in turn. Also I am graciously pleased (yes, and very
    much pleased!) to 'let you write to-morrow.' How you spoil me with
    goodness, which makes one 'insolent' as I was saying, now and then.


    The worst is, that I write 'too kind' letters—I!—and what does that
    criticism mean, pray? It reminds me, at least, of ... now I will tell
    you what it reminds me of.


    A few days ago Henrietta said to me that she was quite uncomfortable.
    She had written to somebody a not kind enough letter, she thought, and
    it might be taken ill. 'Are you ever uncomfortable, Ba, after you
    have sent letters to the post?' she asked me.


    'Yes,' I said, 'sometimes, but from a reason just the very reverse of
    your reason, my letters, when they get into the post, seem too
    kind,—rather.' And my sisters laughed ... laughed.


    But if you think so beside, I must seriously set to work, you see,
    to correct that flagrant fault, and shall do better in time dis
    faventibus, though it will be difficult.


    Mr. Kenyon's dinner is a riddle which I cannot read. You are
    invited to meet Miss Thomson and Mr. Bayley and 'no one else.'
    George is invited to meet Mr. Browning and Mr. Procter and 'no one
    else'—just those words. The 'absolu' (do you remember Balzac's
    beautiful story?) is just you and 'no one else,' the other elements
    being mere uncertainties, shifting while one looks for them.


    Am I not writing nonsense to-night? I am not 'too wise' in any case,
    which is some comfort. It puts one in spirits to hear of your being
    'well,' ever and ever dearest. Keep so for me. May God bless you
    hour by hour. In every one of mine I am your own

Ba.


    For Miss Mitford ...

But people are not angels quite ...

and she sees the whole world in stripes of black and white, it is her
    way. I feel very affectionately towards her, love her sincerely. She
    is affectionate to me beyond measure. Still, always I feel that if I
    were to vex her, the lower deep below the lowest deep would not be low
    enough for me. I always feel that. She would advertise me directly
    for a wretch proper.


    Then, for all I said about never changing, I have ice enough over me
    just now to hold the sparrows!—in respect to a great crowd of people,
    and she is among them—for reasons—for reasons.


