
Saturday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 23, 1846.]


    So all was altered, my love—and, instead of Miss T. and the other
    friend, I had your brother and Procter—to my great pleasure. After, I
    went to that place, and soon got away, and am very well this morning
    in the sunshine; which I feel with you, do I not? Yesterday after
    dinner we spoke of Mrs. Jameson, and, as my wont is—(Here your letter
    reaches me—let me finish this sentence now I have finished kissing
    you, dearest beyond all dearness—My own heart's Ba!)—oh, as I am
    used, I left the talking to go on by itself, with the thought busied
    elsewhere, till at last my own voice startled me for I heard my tongue
    utter 'Miss Barrett ... that is, Mrs. Jameson says' ... or 'does ...
    or does not.' I forget which! And if anybody noticed the gaucherie
    it must have been just your brother!


    Now to these letters! I do solemnly, unaffectedly wonder how you can
    put so much pure felicity into an envelope so as that I shall get it
    as from the fount head. This to-day, those yesterday—there is, I see,
    and know, thus much goodness in line after line, goodness to be
    scientifically appreciated, proved there—but over and above, is it
    in the writing, the dots and traces, the seal, the paper—here does
    the subtle charm lie beyond all rational accounting for? The other day
    I stumbled on a quotation from J. Baptista Porta—wherein he avers
    that any musical instrument made out of wood possessed of medicinal
    properties retains, being put to use, such virtues undiminished,—and
    that, for instance, a sick man to whom you should pipe on a pipe of
    elder-tree would so receive all the advantage derivable from a
    decoction of its berries. From whence, by a parity of reasoning, I may
    discover, I think, that the very ink and paper were—ah, what were
    they? Curious thinking won't do for me and the wise head which is
    mine, so I will lie and rest in my ignorance of content and understand
    that without any magic at all you simply wish to make one
    person—which of your free goodness proves to be your R.B.—to make me
    supremely happy, and that you have your wish—you do bless me! More
    and more, for the old treasure is piled undiminished and still the new
    comes glittering in. Dear, dear heart of my heart, life of my life,
    will this last, let me begin to ask? Can it be meant I shall live
    this to the end? Then, dearest, care also for the life beyond, and put
    in my mind how to testify here that I have felt, if I could not
    deserve that a gift beyond all gifts! I hope to work hard, to prove I
    do feel, as I say—it would be terrible to accomplish nothing now.


    With which conviction—renewed conviction time by time, of your
    extravagance of kindness to me unworthy,—will it seem
    characteristically consistent when I pray you not to begin frightening
    me, all the same, with threats of writing less kindly? That must not
    be, love, for your sake now—if you had not thrown open those
    windows of heaven I should have no more imagined than that Syrian lord
    on whom the King leaned 'how such things might be'—but, once their
    influence showered, I should know, too soon and easily, if they shut
    up again! You have committed your dear, dearest self to that course of
    blessing, and blessing on, on, for ever—so let all be as it is, pray,
    pray!


    No—not all. No more, ever, of that strange
    suspicion—'insolent'—oh, what a word!—nor suppose I shall
    particularly wonder at its being fancied applicable to that, of all
    other passages of your letter! It is quite as reasonable to suspect
    the existence of such a quality there as elsewhere: how can such a
    thing, could such a thing come from you to me? But, dear Ba, do
    you know me better! Do feel that I know you, I am bold to believe,
    and that if you were to run at me with a pointed spear I should be
    sure it was a golden sanative, Machaon's touch, for my entire good,
    that I was opening my heart to receive! As for words, written or
    spoken—I, who sin forty times in a day by light words, and untrue to
    the thought, I am certainly not used to be easily offended by other
    peoples' words, people in the world. But your words! And about the
    'mission'; if it had not been a thing to jest at, I should not have
    begun, as I did—as you felt I did. I know now, what I only suspected
    then, and will tell you all the matter on Monday if you care to hear.
    The 'humanity' however, would have been unquestionable if I had chosen
    to exercise it towards the poor weak incapable creature that wants
    somebody, and urgently, I can well believe.


    As for your apologue, it is naught—as you felt, and so broke off—for
    the baron knew well enough it was a spray of the magical tree which
    once planted in his domain would shoot up, and out, and all round, and
    be glorious with leaves and musical with birds' nests, and a fairy
    safeguard and blessing thenceforward and for ever, when the foolish
    baton had been broken into ounces of gold, even if gold it were, and
    spent and vanished: for, he said, such gold lies in the highway, men
    pick it up, more of it or less; but this one slip of the flowering
    tree is all of it on this side Paradise. Whereon he laid it to his
    heart and was happy—in spite of his disastrous chase the night
    before, when so far from catching an unicorn, he saw not even a
    respectable prize-heifer, worth the oil-cake and rape-seed it had
    doubtless cost to rear her—'insolence!'


    I found no opportunity of speaking to Mr. K. about Monday, but nothing
    was said of last Wednesday, and he must know I did not go yesterday.
    So, Monday is laughing in sunshine surely! Bless you, my sweetest. I
    love you with my whole heart; ever shall love you.


