
[Post-mark, February 24, 1846.]


    Ever dearest, it is only when you go away, when you are quite gone,
    out of the house and the street, that I get up and think properly, and
    with the right gratitude of your flowers. Such beautiful flowers you
    brought me this time too! looking like summer itself, and smelling!
    Doing the 'honour due' to the flowers, makes your presence a little
    longer with me, the sun shines back over the hill just by that time,
    and then drops, till the next letter.


    If I had had the letter on Saturday as ought to have been, no, I could
    not have answered it so that you should have my answer on
    Sunday—no, I should still have had to write first.


    Now you understand that I do not object to the writing first, but only
    to the hearing second. I would rather write than not—I! But to be
    written to is the chief gladness of course; and with all you say of
    liking to have my letters (which I like to hear quite enough indeed)
    you cannot pretend to think that yours are not more to me, most to
    me! Ask my guardian-angel and hear what he says! Yours will look
    another way for shame of measuring joys with him! Because as I have
    said before, and as he says now, you are all to me, all the light, all
    the life; I am living for you now. And before I knew you, what was I
    and where? What was the world to me, do you think? and the meaning of
    life? And now, when you come and go, and write and do not write, all
    the hours are chequered accordingly in so many squares of white and
    black, as if for playing at fox and goose ... only there is no fox,
    and I will not agree to be goose for one ... that is you perhaps,
    for being 'too easily' satisfied.


    So my claim is that you are more to me than I can be to you at any
    rate. Mr. Fox said on Sunday that I was a 'religious hermit' who wrote
    'poems which ought to be read in a Gothic alcove'; and religious
    hermits, when they care to see visions, do it better, they all say,
    through fasting and flagellation and seclusion in dark places. St.
    Theresa, for instance, saw a clearer glory by such means, than your
    Sir Moses Montefiore through his hundred-guinea telescope. Think then,
    how every shadow of my life has helped to throw out into brighter,
    fuller significance, the light which comes to me from you ... think
    how it is the one light, seen without distractions.


    I was thinking the other day that certainly and after all (or rather
    before all) I had loved you all my life unawares, that is, the idea of
    you. Women begin for the most part, (if ever so very little given to
    reverie) by meaning, in an aside to themselves, to love such and such
    an ideal, seen sometimes in a dream and sometimes in a book, and
    forswearing their ancient faith as the years creep on. I say a book,
    because I remember a friend of mine who looked everywhere for the
    original of Mr. Ward's 'Tremaine,' because nothing would do for her,
    she insisted, except just that excess of so-called refinement, with
    the book-knowledge and the conventional manners, (loue qui peut,
    Tremaine), and ended by marrying a lieutenant in the Navy who could
    not spell. Such things happen every day, and cannot be otherwise, say
    the wise:—and this being otherwise with me is miraculous
    compensation for the trials of many years, though such abundant,
    overabundant compensation, that I cannot help fearing it is too much,
    as I know that you are too good and too high for me, and that by the
    degree in which I am raised up you are let down, for us two to find a
    level to meet on. One's ideal must be above one, as a matter of
    course, you know. It is as far as one can reach with one's eyes
    (soul-eyes), not reach to touch. And here is mine ... shall I tell
    you? ... even to the visible outward sign of the black hair and the
    complexion (why you might ask my sisters!) yet I would not tell you,
    if I could not tell you afterwards that, if it had been red hair
    quite, it had been the same thing, only I prove the coincidence out
    fully and make you smile half.


    Yet indeed I did not fancy that I was to love you when you came to
    see me—no indeed ... any more than I did your caring on your side. My
    ambition when we began our correspondence, was simply that you should
    forget I was a woman (being weary and blasée of the empty written
    gallantries, of which I have had my share and all the more perhaps
    from my peculiar position which made them so without consequence),
    that you should forget that and let us be friends, and consent to
    teach me what you knew better than I, in art and human nature, and
    give me your sympathy in the meanwhile. I am a great hero-worshipper
    and had admired your poetry for years, and to feel that you liked to
    write to me and be written to was a pleasure and a pride, as I used
    to tell you I am sure, and then your letters were not like other
    letters, as I must not tell you again. Also you influenced me, in a
    way in which no one else did. For instance, by two or three half words
    you made me see you, and other people had delivered orations on the
    same subject quite without effect. I surprised everybody in this house
    by consenting to see you. Then, when you came, you never went away. I
    mean I had a sense of your presence constantly. Yes ... and to prove
    how free that feeling was from the remotest presentiment of what has
    occurred, I said to Papa in my unconsciousness the next morning ...
    'it is most extraordinary how the idea of Mr. Browning does beset
    me—I suppose it is not being used to see strangers, in some
    degree—but it haunts me ... it is a persecution.' On which he smiled
    and said that 'it was not grateful to my friend to use such a word.'
    When the letter came....


    Do you know that all that time I was frightened of you? frightened in
    this way. I felt as if you had a power over me and meant to use it,
    and that I could not breathe or speak very differently from what you
    chose to make me. As to my thoughts, I had it in my head somehow that
    you read them as you read the newspaper—examined them, and fastened
    them down writhing under your long entomological pins—ah, do you
    remember the entomology of it all?


    But the power was used upon me—and I never doubted that you had
    mistaken your own mind, the strongest of us having some exceptional
    weakness. Turning the wonder round in all lights, I came to what you
    admitted yesterday ... yes, I saw that very early ... that you had
    come here with the intention of trying to love whomever you should
    find, ... and also that what I had said about exaggerating the amount
    of what I could be to you, had just operated in making you more
    determined to justify your own presentiment in the face of mine.
    Well—and if that last clause was true a little, too ... why should I
    be sorry now ... and why should you have fancied for a moment, that
    the first could make me sorry. At first and when I did not believe
    that you really loved me, when I thought you deceived yourself,
    then, it was different. But now ... now ... when I see and believe
    your attachment for me, do you think that any cause in the world
    (except what diminished it) could render it less a source of joy to
    me? I mean as far as I myself am considered. Now if you ever fancy
    that I am vain of your love for me, you will be unjust, remember. If
    it were less dear, and less above me, I might be vain perhaps. But I
    may say before God and you, that of all the events of my life,
    inclusive of its afflictions, nothing has humbled me so much as your
    love. Right or wrong it may be, but true it is, and I tell you. Your
    love has been to me like God's own love, which makes the receivers of
    it kneelers.


    Why all this should be written, I do not know—but you set me thinking
    yesterday in that backward line, which I lean back to very often, and
    for once, as you made me write directly, why I wrote, as my thoughts
    went, that way.


    Say how you are, beloved—and do not brood over that 'Soul's Tragedy,'
    which I wish I had here with 'Luria,' because, so, you should not see
    it for a month at least. And take exercise and keep well—and remember
    how many letters I must have before Saturday. May God bless you. Do
    you want to hear me say

I cannot love you less...?

That is a doubtful phrase. And

I cannot love you more

is doubtful too, for reasons I could give. More or less, I really love
    you, but it does not sound right, even so, does it? I know what it
    ought to be, and will put it into the 'seal' and the 'paper' with the
    ineffable other things.


    Dearest, do not go to St. Petersburg. Do not think of going, for fear
    it should come true and you should go, and while you were helping the
    Jews and teaching Nicholas, what (in that case) would become of your

Ba?


