
Wednesday Morning.
[Post-mark, February 25, 1846.]


    Once you were pleased to say, my own Ba, that 'I made you do as I
    would.' I am quite sure, you make me speak as you would, and not at
    all as I mean—and for one instance, I never surely spoke anything
    half so untrue as that 'I came with the intention of loving whomever I
    should find'—No! wreathed shells and hollows in ruins, and roofs of
    caves may transform a voice wonderfully, make more of it or less, or
    so change it as to almost alter, but turn a 'no' into a 'yes' can no
    echo (except the Irish one), and I said 'no' to such a charge, and
    still say 'no.' I did have a presentiment—and though it is hardly
    possible for me to look back on it now without lending it the true
    colours given to it by the event, yet I can put them aside, if I
    please, and remember that I not merely hoped it would not be so (not
    that the effect I expected to be produced would be less than in
    anticipation, certainly I did not hope that, but that it would range
    itself with the old feelings of simple reverence and sympathy and
    friendship, that I should love you as much as I supposed I could
    love, and no more) but in the confidence that nothing could occur to
    divert me from my intended way of life, I made—went on making
    arrangements to return to Italy. You know—did I not tell you—I
    wished to see you before I returned? And I had heard of you just so
    much as seemed to make it impossible such a relation could ever exist.
    I know very well, if you choose to refer to my letters you may easily
    bring them to bear a sense in parts, more agreeable to your own theory
    than to mine, the true one—but that was instinct,
    Providence—anything rather than foresight. Now I will convince you!
    yourself have noticed the difference between the letters and the
    writer; the greater 'distance of the latter from you,' why was that?
    Why, if not because the conduct began with him, with one who had
    now seen you—was no continuation of the conduct, as influenced by the
    feeling, of the letters—else, they, if near, should have enabled
    him, if but in the natural course of time and with increase of
    familiarity, to become nearer—but it was not so! The letters began
    by loving you after their way—but what a world-wide difference
    between that love and the true, the love from seeing and hearing and
    feeling, since you make me resolve, what now lies blended so
    harmoniously, into its component parts. Oh, I know what is old from
    what is new, and how chrystals may surround and glorify other vessels
    meant for ordinary service than Lord N's! But I don't know that
    handling may not snap them off, some of the more delicate ones; and if
    you let me, love, I will not again, ever again, consider how it came
    and whence, and when, so curiously, so pryingly, but believe that it
    was always so, and that it all came at once, all the same; the more
    unlikelinesses the better, for they set off the better the truth of
    truths that here, ('how begot? how nourished?')—here is the whole
    wondrous Ba filling my whole heart and soul; and over-filling it,
    because she is in all the world, too, where I look, where I fancy. At
    the same time, because all is so wondrous and so sweet, do you think
    that it would be so difficult for me to analyse it, and give causes
    to the effects in sufficiently numerous instances, even to 'justify my
    presentiment?' Ah, dear, dearest Ba, I could, could indeed, could
    account for all, or enough! But you are unconscious, I do believe, of
    your power, and the knowledge of it would be no added grace, perhaps!
    So let us go on—taking a lesson out of the world's book in a
    different sense. You shall think I love you for—(tell me, you must,
    what for) while in my secret heart I know what my 'mission of
    humanity' means, and what telescopic and microscopic views it procures
    me. Enough—Wait, one word about the 'too kind letters'—could not the
    same Montefiore understand that though he deserved not one of his
    thousand guineas, yet that he is in disgrace if they bate him of his
    next gift by merely ten? It is all too kind—but I shall feel the
    diminishing of the kindness, be very sure! Of that there is, however,
    not too alarming a sign in this dearest, because last of all—dearest
    letter of all—till the next! I looked yesterday over the 'Tragedy,'
    and think it will do after all. I will bring one part at least next
    time, and 'Luria' take away, if you let me, so all will be off my
    mind, and April and May be the welcomer? Don't think I am going to
    take any extraordinary pains. There are some things in the 'Tragedy' I
    should like to preserve and print now, leaving the future to spring
    as it likes, in any direction, and these half-dead, half-alive works
    fetter it, if left behind.


    Yet one thing will fetter it worse, only one thing—if you, in any
    respect, stay behind? You that in all else help me and will help me,
    beyond words—beyond dreams—if, because I find you, your own works
    stop—'then comes the Selah and the voice is hushed.' Oh, no, no,
    dearest, so would the help cease to be help—the joy to be joy, Ba
    herself to be quite Ba, and my own Siren singing song for song. Dear
    love, will that be kind, and right, and like the rest? Write and
    promise that all shall be resumed, the romance-poem chiefly, and I
    will try and feel more yours than ever now. Am I not with you in the
    world, proud of you—and vain, too, very likely, which is all the
    sweeter if it is a sin as you teach me. Indeed dearest, I have set my
    heart on your fulfilling your mission—my heart is on it! Bless you,
    my Ba—

Your R.B.


    I am so well as to have resumed the shower-bath (this morning)—and I
    walk, especially near the elms and stile—and mean to walk, and be
    very well—and you, dearest?


