
[Post-mark, February 26, 1846.]


    I confess that while I was writing those words I had a thought that
    they were not quite yours as you said them. Still it comes to
    something in their likeness, but we will not talk of it and break off
    the chrystals—they are so brittle, then? do you know that by an
    'instinct.' But I agree that it is best not to talk—I 'gave it up' as
    a riddle long ago. Let there be 'analysis' even, and it will not be
    solution. I have my own thoughts of course, and you have yours, and
    the worst is that a third person looking down on us from some
    snow-capped height, and free from personal influences, would have
    his thoughts too, and he would think that if you had been
    reasonable as usual you would have gone to Italy. I have by heart (or
    by head at least) what the third person would think. The third person
    thundered to me in an abstraction for ever so long, and at intervals I
    hear him still, only you shall not to-day, because he talks 'damnable
    iterations' and teazes you. Nay, the first person is teazing you now
    perhaps, without going any further, and yet I must go a little
    further, just to say (after accepting all possible unlikelinesses and
    miracles, because everything was miraculous and impossible) that it
    was agreed between us long since that you did not love me for
    anything—your having no reason for it is the only way of your not
    seeming unreasonable. Also for my own sake. I like it to be so—I
    cannot have peace with the least change from it. Dearest, take the
    baron's hawthorn bough which, in spite of his fine dream of it is dead
    since the other day, and so much the worse than when I despised it
    last—take that dead stick and push it upright into the sand as the
    tide rises, and the whole blue sea draws up its glittering breadth and
    length towards and around it. But what then? What does that prove?
    ... as the philosopher said of the poem. So we ought not to talk of
    such things; and we get warned off even in the accidental
    illustrations taken up to light us. Still, the stick certainly did not
    draw the sea.


    Dearest and best you were yesterday, to write me the little note! You
    are better than the imaginations of my heart, and they, as far as
    they relate to you (not further) are not desperately wicked, I
    think. I always expect the kindest things from you, and you always are
    doing some kindness beyond what is expected, and this is a miracle
    too, like the rest, now isn't it? When the knock came last night, I
    knew it was your letter, and not another's. Just another little leaf
    of my Koran! How I thank you ... thank you! If I write too kind
    letters, as you say, why they may be too kind for me to send, but not
    for you to receive; and I suppose I think more of you than of me,
    which accounts for my writing them, accounts and justifies. And that
    is my reflection not now for the first time. For we break rules very
    often—as that exegetical third person might expound to you clearly
    out of the ninety-sixth volume of the 'Code of Conventions,' only you
    are not like another, nor have you been to me like another—you began
    with most improvident and (will you let me say?) unmasculine
    generosity, and Queen Victoria does not sit upon a mat after the
    fashion of Queen Pomare, nor should.


    But ... but ... you know very fully that you are breaking faith in the
    matter of the 'Tragedy' and 'Luria'—you promised to rest—and you
    rest for three days. Is it so that people get well? or keep well?
    Indeed I do not think I shall let you have 'Luria.' Ah—be careful, I
    do beseech you—be careful. There is time for a pause, and the works
    will profit by it themselves. And you! And I ... if you are ill!—


    For the rest I will let you walk in my field, and see my elms as much
    as you please ... though I hear about the shower bath with a little
    suspicion. Why, if it did you harm before, should it not again? and
    why should you use it, if it threatens harm? Now tell me if it hasn't
    made you rather unwell since the new trial!—tell me, dear, dearest.


    As for myself, I believe that you set about exhorting me to be busy,
    just that I might not reproach you for the over-business. Confess
    that that was the only meaning of the exhortation. But no, you are
    quite serious, you say. You even threaten me in a sort of underground
    murmur, which sounds like a nascent earthquake; and if I do not write
    so much a day directly, your stipendiary magistrateship will take away
    my license to be loved ... I am not to be Ba to you any longer ... you
    say! And is this right? now I ask you. Ever so many chrystals fell
    off by that stroke of the baton, I do assure you. Only you did not
    mean quite what you said so too articulately, and you will unsay it,
    if you please, and unthink it near the elms.


    As for the writing, I will write ... I have written ... I am writing.
    You do not fancy that I have given up writing?—No. Only I have
    certainly been more loitering and distracted than usual in what I have
    done, which is not my fault—nor yours directly—and I feel an
    indisposition to setting about the romance, the hand of the soul
    shakes. I am too happy and not calm enough, I suppose, to have the
    right inclination. Well—it will come. But all in blots and fragments
    there are verses enough, to fill a volume done in the last year.


    And if there were not ... if there were none ... I hold that I should
    be Ba, and also your Ba ... which is 'insolence' ... will you say?


