
[Post-mark, February 27, 1846.]


    To be sure my 'first person' was nonsensical, and, in that respect
    made speak properly, I hope, only he was cut short in the middle of
    his performance by the exigencies of the post. So, never mind what
    such persons say, my sweetest, because they know nothing at all—quod
    erat demonstrandum. But you, love, you speak roses, and
    hawthorn-blossoms when you tell me of the cloak put on, and the
    descent, and the entry, and staying and delaying. I will have had a
    hand in all that; I know what I wished all the morning, and now this
    much came true! But you should have seen the regimentals, if I could
    have so contrived it, for I confess to a Chinese love for bright
    red—the very names 'vermilion' 'scarlet' warm me, yet in this cold
    climate nobody wears red to comfort one's eye save soldiers and fox
    hunters, and old women fresh from a Parish Christmas Distribution of
    cloaks. To dress in floating loose crimson silk, I almost understand
    being a Cardinal! Do you know anything of Nat Lee's Tragedies? In one
    of them a man angry with a Cardinal cries—

Stand back, and let me mow this poppy down,
This rank red weed that spoils the Churches' corn.

Is not that good? and presently, when the same worthy is poisoned
    (that is the Cardinal)—they bid him—'now, Cardinal, lie down and
    roar!'

Think of thy scarlet sins!

Of the justice of all which, you will judge with no Mrs. Jameson for
    guide when we see the Sistina together, I trust! By the way, yesterday
    I went to Dulwich to see some pictures, by old Teniers, Murillo,
    Gainsborough, Raphael!—then twenty names about, and last but one, as
    if just thought of, 'Correggio.' The whole collection, including 'a
    divine picture by Murillo,' and Titian's Daughter (hitherto supposed
    to be in the Louvre)—the whole I would, I think, have cheerfully
    given a pound or two for the privilege of not possessing—so execrable
    as sign-paintings even! 'Are there worse poets in their way than
    painters?' Yet the melancholy business is here—that the bad poet goes
    out of his way, writes his verses in the language he learned in order
    to do a hundred other things with it, all of which he can go on and do
    afterwards—but the painter has spent the best of his life in learning
    even how to produce such monstrosities as these, and to what other
    good do his acquisitions go? This short minute of life our one chance,
    an eternity on either side! and a man does not walk whistling and
    ruddy by the side of hawthorn hedges in spring, but shuts himself up
    and conies out after a dozen years with 'Titian's Daughter' and,
    there, gone is his life, let somebody else try!


    I have tried—my trial is made too!


    To-morrow you shall tell me, dearest, that Mrs. Jameson wondered to
    see you so well—did she not wonder? Ah, to-morrow! There is a lesson
    from all this writing and mistaking and correcting and being
    corrected; and what, but that a word goes safely only from lip to lip,
    dearest? See how the cup slipped from the lip and snapped the
    chrystals, you say! But the writing is but for a time—'a time and
    times and half a time!'—would I knew when the prophetic weeks end!
    Still, one day, as I say, no more writing, (and great scandalization
    of the third person, peeping through the fringes of Flush's ears!)
    meanwhile, I wonder whether if I meet Mrs. Jameson I may practise
    diplomacy and say carelessly 'I should be glad to know what Miss B. is
    like—' No, that I must not do, something tells me, 'for reasons, for
    reasons'—


    I do not know—you may perhaps have to wait a little longer for my
    'divine Murillo' of a Tragedy. My sister is copying it as I give the
    pages, but—in fact my wise head does ache a little—it is
    inconceivable! As if it took a great storm to topple over some stone,
    and once the stone pushed from its right place, any bird's foot, which
    would hardly bend the hawthorn spray, may set it trembling! The aching
    begins with reading the presentation-list at the Drawing-room quite
    naturally, and with no shame at all! But it is gentle, well-behaved
    aching now, so I do care, as you bid me, Ba, my Ba, whom I call Ba
    to my heart but could not, I really believe, call so before another,
    even your sister, if—if—


    But Ba, I call you boldly here, and I dare kiss your dear, dear eyes,
    till to-morrow—Bless you, my own.


