
Sunday.
[Post-mark, March 2, 1846.]


    You never could think that I meant any insinuation against you by a
    word of what was said yesterday, or that I sought or am likely to seek
    a 'security'! do you know it was not right of you to use such an
    expression—indeed no. You were angry with me for just one minute, or
    you would not have used it—and why? Now what did I say that was wrong
    or unkind even by construction? If I did say anything, it was three
    times wrong, and unjust as well as unkind, and wronged my own heart
    and consciousness of all that you are to me, more than it could you.
    But you began speaking of yourself just as a woman might speak under
    the same circumstances (you remember what you said), and then I,
    remembering that all the men in the world would laugh such an idea to
    scorn, said something to that effect, you know. I once was in
    company with a man, however, who valued himself very much on his
    constancy to a woman who was so deeply affected by it that she became
    his wife at last ... and the whole neighbourhood came out to stare at
    him on that ground as a sort of monster. And can you guess what the
    constancy meant? Seven years before, he loved that woman, he said, and
    she repulsed him. 'And in the meantime, how many?' I had the
    impertinence to ask a female friend who told me the tale. 'Why,' she
    answered with the utmost simplicity, 'I understand that Miss A. and
    Miss B. and Mrs. C. would not listen to him, but he took Miss D.'s
    rejection most to heart.' That was the head and front of his
    'constancy' to Miss E., who had been loved, she boasted, for seven
    years ... that is, once at the beginning and once at the end. It was
    just a coincidence of the 'premier pas' and the 'pis aller.'


    Beloved, I could not mean this for you; you are not made of such
    stuff, as we both know.


    And for myself, it was my compromise with my own scruples, that you
    should not be 'chained' to me, not in the merest metaphor, that you
    should not seem to be bound, in honour or otherwise, so that if you
    stayed with me it should be your free choice to stay, not the
    consequence of a choice so many months before. That was my
    compromise with my scruples, and not my doubt of your affection—and
    least of all, was it an intention of trifling with you sooner or later
    that made me wish to suspend all decisions as long as possible. I
    have decided (for me) to let it be as you shall please—now I told you
    that before. Either we will live on as we are, until an obstacle
    arises,—for indeed I do not look for a 'security' where you suppose,
    and the very appearance of it there, is what most rebuts me—or I
    will be yours in the obvious way, to go out of England the next
    half-hour if possible. As to the steps to be taken (or not taken)
    before the last step, we must think of those. The worst is that the
    only question is about a form. Virtually the evil is the same all
    round, whatever we do. Dearest, it was plain to see yesterday evening
    when he came into this room for a moment at seven o'clock, before
    going to his own to dress for dinner ... plain to see, that he was not
    altogether pleased at finding you here in the morning. There was no
    pretext for objecting gravely—but it was plain that he was not
    pleased. Do not let this make you uncomfortable, he will forget all
    about it, and I was not scolded, do you understand. It was more
    manner, but my sisters thought as I did of the significance:—and it
    was enough to prove to me (if I had not known) what a desperate game
    we should be playing if we depended on a yielding nerve there.


    And to-day I went down-stairs (to prove how my promises stand) though
    I could find at least ten good excuses for remaining in my own room,
    for our cousin, Sam Barrett, who brought the interruption yesterday
    and put me out of humour (it wasn't the fault of the dear little
    cousin, Lizzie ... my 'portrait' ... who was 'so sorry,' she said,
    dear child, to have missed Papa somewhere on the stairs!) the cousin
    who should have been in Brittany yesterday instead of here, sate in
    the drawing-room all this morning, and had visitors there, and so I
    had excellent excuses for never moving from my chair. Yet, the field
    being clear at half-past two! I went for half an hour, just—just
    for you. Did you think of me, I wonder? It was to meet your thoughts
    that I went, dear dearest.


    How clever these sketches are. The expression produced by such
    apparently inadequate means is quite striking; and I have been making
    my brothers admire them, and they 'wonder you don't think of employing
    them in an illustrated edition of your works.' Which might be, really!
    Ah, you did not ask for 'Luria'! Not that I should have let you have
    it!—I think I should not indeed. Dearest, you take care of the head
    ... and don't make that tragedy of the soul one for mine, by letting
    it make you ill. Beware too of the shower-bath—it plainly does not
    answer for you at this season. And walk, and think of me for your
    good, if such a combination should be possible.


    And I think of you ... if I do not of Italy. Yet I forget to speak
    to you of the Dulwich Gallery. I never saw those pictures, but am
    astonished that the whole world should be wrong in praising them.
    'Divine' is a bad word for Murillo in any case—because he is
    intensely human in his most supernatural subjects. His beautiful
    Trinity in the National Gallery, which I saw the last time I went out
    to look at pictures, has no deity in it—and I seem to see it now. And
    do you remember the visitation of the angels to Abraham (the Duke of
    Sutherland's picture—is it not?) where the mystic visitors look like
    shepherds who had not even dreamt of God? But I always understood that
    that Dulwich Gallery was famous for great works—you surprise me! And
    for painters ... their badness is more ostentatious than that of
    poets—they stare idiocy out of the walls, and set the eyes of
    sensitive men on edge. For the rest, however, I very much doubt
    whether they wear their lives more to rags, than writers who mistake
    their vocation in poetry do. There is a mechanism in poetry as in the
    other art—and, to men not native to the way of it, it runs hard and
    heavily. The 'cudgelling of the brain' is as good labour as the
    grinding of the colours, ... do you not think?


    If ever I am in the Sistine Chapel, it will not be with Mrs.
    Jameson—no. If ever I should be there, what teaching I shall want,
    I who have seen so few pictures, and love them only as children do,
    with an unlearned love, just for the sake of the thoughts they bring.
    Wonderfully ignorant I am, to have had eyes and ears so long! There is
    music, now, which lifts the hair on my head, I feel it so much, ...
    yet all I know of it as art, all I have heard of the works of the
    masters in it, has been the mere sign and suggestion, such as the
    private piano may give. I never heard an oratorio, for instance, in my
    life—judge by that! It is a guess, I make, at all the greatness and
    divinity ... feeling in it, though, distinctly and certainly, that a
    composer like Beethoven must stand above the divinest painter in
    soul-godhead, and nearest to the true poet, of all artists. And this
    I felt in my guess, long before I knew you. But observe how, if I had
    died in this illness, I should have left a sealed world behind me!
    you, unknown too—unguessed at, you, ... in many respects,
    wonderfully unguessed at! Lately I have learnt to despise my own
    instincts. And apart from those—and you, ... it was right for me to
    be melancholy, in the consciousness of passing blindfolded under all
    the world-stars, and of going out into another side of the creation,
    with a blank for the experience of this ... the last revelation,
    unread! How the thought of it used to depress me sometimes!


    Talking of music, I had a proposition the other day from certain of
    Mr. Russell's (the singer's) friends, about his setting to music my
    'Cry of the Children.' His programme exhibits all the horrors of the
    world, I see! Lifeboats ... madhouses ... gamblers' wives ... all done
    to the right sort of moaning. His audiences must go home delightfully
    miserable, I should fancy. He has set the 'Song of the Shirt' ... and
    my 'Cry of the Children' will be acceptable, it is supposed, as a
    climax of agony. Do you know this Mr. Russell, and what sort of music
    he suits to his melancholy? But to turn my 'Cry' to a 'Song,' a
    burden, it is said, is required—he can't sing it without a burden!
    and behold what has been sent 'for my approval'.... I shall copy it
    verbatim for you....

And the threads twirl, twirl, twirl,
       
Before each boy and girl;
And the wheels, big and little, still whirl, whirl, whirl.


... accompaniment agitato, imitating the roar of the machinery!


    This is not endurable ... ought not to be ... should it now? Do tell
    me.


    May God bless you, very dearest! Let me hear how you are—and think
    how I am

Your own....


