
Sunday Evening.
[Post-mark, March 2, 1846.]


    One or two words, if no more, I must write to dearest Ba, the night
    would go down in double blackness if I had neither written nor been
    written to! So here is another piece of 'kindness' on my part, such as
    I have received praise for of late! My own sweetest, there is just
    this good in such praise, that by it one comes to something pleasantly
    definite amid the hazy uncertainties of mere wishes and
    possibilities—while my whole heart does, does so yearn, love, to do
    something to prove its devotion for you; and, now and then, amuses
    itself with foolish imaginings of real substantial services to which
    it should be found equal if fortune so granted; suddenly you interpose
    with thanks, in such terms as would all too much reward the highest of
    even those services which are never to be; and for what?—for a note,
    a going to Town, a ——! Well, there are definite beginnings
    certainly, if you will recognise them—I mean, that since you do
    accept, far from 'despising this day of small things,' then I may
    take heart, and be sure that even though none of the great
    achievements should fall to my happy chance, still the barrenest,
    flattest life will—must of needs produce in its season better
    fruits than these poor ones—I keep it, value it, now, that it may
    produce such.


    Also I determine never again to 'analyse,' nor let you analyse if the
    sweet mouth can be anyway stopped: the love shall be one and
    indivisible—and the Loves we used to know from

One another huddled lie ...
Close beside Her tenderly—

(which is surely the next line). Now am I not anxious to know what
    your father said? And if anybody else said or wondered ... how  hould
    I know? Of all fighting—the warfare with shadows—what a work is
    there. But tell me,—and, with you for me—


    Bless me dearest ever, as the face above mine blesses me—

Your own


    Sir Moses set off this morning, I hear—somebody yesterday called the
    telescope an 'optical delusion,' anticipating many more of the kind!
    So much for this 'wandering Jew.'


