
Monday Evening.
[Post-mark, March 3, 1846.]


    Upon the whole, I think, I am glad when you are kept in town and
    prevented from writing what you call 'much' to me. Because in the
    first place, the little from you, is always much to me—and then,
    besides, the letter comes, and with it the promise of another! Two
    letters have I had from you to-day, ever dearest! How I thank
    you!—yes, indeed! It was like yourself to write yesterday ... to
    remember what a great gap there would have been otherwise, as it
    looked on this side—here. The worst of Saturday is (when you come on
    it) that Sunday follows—Saturday night bringing no letter. Well, it
    was very good of you, best of you!


    For the 'analyzing' I give it up willingly, only that I must say what
    altogether I forgot to say in my last letter, that it was not I, if
    you please, who spoke of the chrystals breaking away! And you, to
    quote me with that certainty! "The chrystals are broken off," you
    say.' I say!! When it was in your letter, and not at all in mine!!


    The truth is that I was stupid, rather, about the Dulwich
    collection—it was my fault. I caught up the idea of the gallery out
    of a heap of other thoughts, and really might have known better if I
    had given myself a chance, by considering.


    Mr. Kenyon came to-day, and has taken out a licence, it seems to me,
    for praising you, for he praised and praised. Somebody has told him
    (who had spent several days with you in a house with a large library)
    that he came away 'quite astounded by the versatility of your
    learning'—and that, to complete the circle, you discoursed as
    scientifically on the training of greyhounds and breeding of ducks as
    if you had never done anything else all your life. Then dear Mr.
    Kenyon talked of the poems; and hoped, very earnestly I am sure, that
    you would finish 'Saul'—which you ought to do, must do—only not
    now. By the way Mrs. Coleridge had written to him to enquire whether
    you had authority for the 'blue lilies,' rather than white. Then he
    asked about 'Luria' and 'whether it was obscure'; and I said, not
    unless the people, who considered it, began by blindfolding
    themselves.


    And where do you think Mr. Kenyon talks of going next February—a long
    while off to be sure? To Italy of course. Everybody I ever heard of
    seems to be going to Italy next winter. He visits his brother at
    Vienna, and 'may cross the Alps and get to Pisa'—it is the shadow of
    a scheme—nothing certain, so far.


    I did not go down-stairs to-day because the wind blew and the
    thermometer fell. To-morrow, perhaps I may. And you, dearest
    dearest, might have put into the letters how you were when you wrote
    them. You might—but you did not feel well and would not say so.
    Confess that that was the reason. Reason or no reason, mention
    yourself to-morrow, and for the rest, do not write a long letter so as
    to increase the evil. There was nothing which I can remember as
    requiring an answer in what I wrote to you, and though I will have
    my letter of course, it shall be as brief as possible, if briefness is
    good for you—now always remember that. Why if I, who talk against
    'Luria,' should work the mischief myself, what should I deserve? I
    should be my own jury directly and not recommend to mercy ... not to
    mine. Do take care—care for me just so much.


    And, except that taking care of your health, what would you do for me
    that you have not done? You have given me the best of the possible
    gifts of one human soul to another, you have made my life new, and am
    I to count these things as small and insufficient? Ah, you know, you
    know that I cannot, ought not, will not.


    May God bless you. He blesses me in letting me be grateful to you as
    your Ba.


