
Tuesday.
[Post-mark, March 3, 1846.]


    First and most important of all,—dearest, 'angry'—with you, and for
    that! It is just as if I had spoken contemptuously of that Gallery I
    so love and so am grateful to—having been used to go there when a
    child, far under the age allowed by the regulations—those two Guidos,
    the wonderful Rembrandt of Jacob's vision, such a Watteau, the
    triumphant three Murillo pictures, a Giorgione music-lesson group,
    all the Poussins with the 'Armida' and 'Jupiter's nursing'—and—no
    end to 'ands'—I have sate before one, some one of those pictures I
    had predetermined to see, a good hour and then gone away ... it used
    to be a green half-hour's walk over the fields. So much for one error,
    now for the second like unto it; what I meant by charging you with
    seeing, (not, not 'looking for')—seeing undue 'security' in
    that, in the form,—I meant to say 'you talk about me being 'free'
    now, free till then, and I am rather jealous of the potency
    attributed to the form, with all its solemnity, because it is a
    form, and no more—yet you frankly agree with me that that form
    complied with, there is no redemption; yours I am then sure enough,
    to repent at leisure &c. &c.' So I meant to ask, 'then, all now
    said, all short of that particular form of saying it, all goes for
    comparatively nothing'? Here it is written down—you 'wish to
    suspend all decisions as long as possible'—that form effects the
    decision, then,—till then, 'where am I'? Which is just what Lord
    Chesterfield cautions people against asking when they tell stories.
    Love, Ba, my own heart's dearest, if all is not decided
    now—why—hear a story, à propos of storytelling, and deduce what is
    deducible. A very old Unitarian minister met a still older evangelical
    brother—John Clayton (from whose son's mouth I heard what you shall
    hear)—the two fell to argument about the true faith to be held—after
    words enough, 'Well,' said the Unitarian, as winding up the
    controversy with an amicable smile—'at least let us hope we are both
    engaged in the pursuit of Truth!'—'Pursuit do you say?' cried the
    other, 'here am I with my years eighty and odd—if I haven't found
    Truth by this time where is my chance, pray?' My own Ba, if I have not
    already decided, alas for me and the solemn words that are to help!
    Though in another point of view there would be some luxurious feeling,
    beyond the ordinary, in knowing one was kept safe to one's heart's
    good by yet another wall than the hitherto recognised ones. Is there
    any parallel in the notion I once heard a man deliver himself of in
    the street—a labourer talking with his friends about 'wishes'—and
    this one wished, if he might get his wish, 'to have a nine gallon cask
    of strong ale set running that minute and his own mouth to be tied
    under it'—the exquisiteness of the delight was to be in the security
    upon security,—the being 'tied.' Now, Ba says I shall not be
    'chained' if she can help!


    But now—here all the jesting goes. You tell me what was observed in
    the 'moment's' visit; by you, and (after, I suppose) by your sisters.
    First, I will always see with your eyes there—next, what I see I
    will never speak, if it pain you; but just this much truth I ought
    to say, I think. I always give myself to you for the worst I am,—full
    of faults as you will find, if you have not found them. But I will
    not affect to be so bad, so wicked, as I count wickedness, as to call
    that conduct other than intolerable—there, in my conviction of
    that, is your real 'security' and mine for the future as the
    present. That a father choosing to give out of his whole day some five
    minutes to a daughter, supposed to be prevented from participating in
    what he, probably, in common with the whole world of sensible men, as
    distinguished from poets and dreamers, consider every pleasure of
    life, by a complete foregoing of society—that he, after the Pisa
    business and the enforced continuance, and as he must believe,
    permanence of this state in which any other human being would go
    mad—I do dare say, for the justification of God, who gave the mind to
    be used in this world,—where it saves us, we are taught, or
    destroys us,—and not to be sunk quietly, overlooked, and forgotten;
    that, under these circumstances, finding ... what, you say, unless he
    thinks he does find, he would close the door of his house instantly;
    a mere sympathizing man, of the same literary tastes, who comes
    good-naturedly, on a proper and unexceptionable introduction, to chat
    with and amuse a little that invalid daughter, once a month, so far as
    is known, for an hour perhaps,—that such a father should show
    himself 'not pleased plainly,' at such a circumstance ... my Ba, it
    is shocking! See, I go wholly on the supposition that the real
    relation is not imagined to exist between us. I so completely could
    understand a repugnance to trust you to me were the truth known, that,
    I will confess, I have several times been afraid the very reverse of
    this occurrence would befall; that your father would have at some time
    or other thought himself obliged, by the usual feeling of people in
    such cases, to see me for a few minutes and express some commonplace
    thanks after the customary mode (just as Capt. Domett sent a heap of
    unnecessary thanks to me not long ago for sending now a letter now a
    book to his son in New Zealand—keeping up the spirits of poor dear
    Alfred now he is cut off from the world at large)—and if this had
    been done, I shall not deny that my heart would have accused
    me—unreasonably I know but still, suppression, and reserve, and
    apprehension—the whole of that is horrible always! But this way of
    looking on the endeavour of anybody, however humble, to just preserve
    your life, remedy in some degree the first, if it was the first,
    unjustifiable measure,—this being 'displeased'—is exactly what I did
    not calculate upon. Observe, that in this only instance I am able
    to do as I shall be done by; to take up the arms furnished by the
    world, the usages of society—this is monstrous on the world's
    showing! I say this now that I may never need recur to it—that you
    may understand why I keep such entire silence henceforth.


    Get but well, keep but as well, and all is easy now. This wonderful
    winter—the spring—the summer—you will take exercise, go up and down
    stairs, get strong. I pray you, at your feet, to do this, dearest!
    Then comes Autumn, with the natural expectations, as after rouge one
    expects noir: the likelihood of a severe winter after this mild
    one, which to prevent, you reiterate your demand to go and save your
    life in Italy, ought you not to do that? And the matters brought to
    issue, (with even, if possible, less shadow of ground for a refusal
    than before, if you are well, plainly well enough to bear the
    voyage) there I will bid you 'be mine in the obvious way'—if you
    shall preserve your belief in me—and you may in much, in all
    important to you. Mr. Kenyon's praise is undeserved enough, but
    yesterday Milnes said I was the only literary man he ever knew, tenax
    propositi, able to make out a life for himself and abide in
    it—'for,' he went on, 'you really do live without any of this
    titillation and fussy dependence upon adventitious excitement of all
    kinds, they all say they can do without.' That is more true—and I
    intend by God's help to live wholly for you; to spend my whole
    energies in reducing to practice the feeling which occupies me, and in
    the practical operation of which, the other work I had proposed to do
    will be found included, facilitated—I shall be able—but of this
    there is plenty time to speak hereafter—I shall, I believe, be able
    to do this without even allowing the world to very much
    misinterpret—against pure lying there is no defence, but all up to
    that I hope to hinder or render unimportant—as you shall know in time
    and place.


    I have written myself grave, but write to me, dear, dearest, and I
    will answer in a lighter mood—even now I can say how it was
    yesterday's hurry happened. I called on Milnes—who told me Hanmer had
    broken a bone in his leg and was laid up, so I called on him too—on
    Moxon, by the way, (his brother telling me strangely cheering news,
    from the grimmest of faces, about my books selling and likely to sell
    ... your wishes, Ba!)—then in Bond Street about some business with
    somebody, then on Mrs. Montagu who was out walking all the time, and
    home too. I found a letter from Mr. Kenyon, perfectly kind, asking me
    to go on Monday to meet friends, and with yours to-day comes another
    confirming the choice of the day. How entirely kind he is!


    I am very well, much better, indeed—taking that bath with sensibly
    good effect, to-night I go to Montagu's again; for shame, having kept
    away too long.


    And the rest shall answer yours—dear! Not 'much to answer?' And
    Beethoven, and Painting and—what is the rest and shall be answered!
    Bless you, now, my darling—I love you, ever shall love you, ever be
    your own.


