
Tuesday Evening.
[Post-mark, March 4, 1846.]


    Yes, but, dearest, you mistake me, or you mistake yourself. I am sure
    I do not over-care for forms—it is not my way to do it—and in this
    case ... no. Still you must see that here is a fact as well as a form,
    and involving a frightful quantity of social inconvenience (to use the
    mildest word) if too hastily entered on. I deny altogether looking
    for, or 'seeing' any 'security' in it for myself—it is a mere form
    for the heart and the happiness: illusions may pass after as before.
    Still the truth is that if they were to pass with you now, you stand
    free to act according to the wide-awakeness of your eyes, and to
    reform your choice ... see! whereas afterward you could not carry out
    such a reformation while I was alive, even if I helped you. All I
    could do for you would be to walk away. And you pretend not to see
    this broad distinction?—ah. For me I have seen just this and no more,
    and have felt averse to forestall, to seem to forestall even by an
    hour, or a word, that stringency of the legal obligation from which
    there is in a certain sense no redemption. Tie up your drinker under
    the pour of his nine gallons, and in two minutes he will moan and
    writhe (as you perfectly know) like a Brinvilliers under the
    water-torture. That he asked to be tied up, was unwise on his own
    principle of loving ale. And you sha'n't be 'chained' up, if you
    were to ask twenty times: if you have found truth or not in the
    water-well.


    You do not see aright what I meant to tell you on another subject. If
    he was displeased, (and it was expressed by a shadow a mere negation
    of pleasure) it was not with you as a visitor and my friend. You must
    not fancy such a thing. It was a sort of instinctive indisposition
    towards seeing you here—unexplained to himself, I have no doubt—of
    course unexplained, or he would have desired me to receive you never
    again, that would have been done at once and unscrupulously. But
    without defining his own feeling, he rather disliked seeing you
    here—it just touched one of his vibratory wires, brushed by and
    touched it—oh, we understand in this house. He is not a nice
    observer, but, at intervals very wide, he is subject to
    lightnings—call them fancies, sometimes right, sometimes wrong.
    Certainly it was not in the character of a 'sympathising friend' that
    you made him a very little cross on Monday. And yet you never were nor
    will be in danger of being thanked, he would not think of it. For
    the reserve, the apprehension—dreadful those things are, and
    desecrating to one's own nature—but we did not make this position, we
    only endure it. The root of the evil is the miserable misconception of
    the limits and character of parental rights—it is a mistake of the
    intellect rather than of the heart. Then, after using one's children
    as one's chattels for a time, the children drop lower and lower toward
    the level of the chattels, and the duties of human sympathy to them
    become difficult in proportion. And (it seems strange to say it, yet
    it is true) love, he does not conceive of at all. He has feeling, he
    can be moved deeply, he is capable of affection in a peculiar way, but
    that, he does not understand, any more than he understands Chaldee,
    respecting it less of course.


    And you fancy that I could propose Italy again? after saying too that
    I never would? Oh no, no—yet there is time to think of this, a
    superfluity of time, ... 'time, times and half a time' and to make
    one's head swim with leaning over a precipice is not wise. The roar
    of the world comes up too, as you hear and as I heard from the
    beginning. There will be no lack of 'lying,' be sure—'pure lying'
    too—and nothing you can do, dearest dearest, shall hinder my being
    torn to pieces by most of the particularly affectionate friends I have
    in the world. Which I do not think of much, any more than of Italy.
    You will be mad, and I shall be bad ... and that will be the effect
    of being poets! 'Till when, where are you?'—why in the very deepest
    of my soul—wherever in it is the fountain head of loving! beloved,
    there you are!


    Some day I shall ask you 'in form,'—as I care so much for forms, it
    seems,—what your 'faults' are, these immense multitudinous faults of
    yours, which I hear such talk of, and never, never, can get to see.
    Will you give me a catalogue raisonnée of your faults? I should like
    it, I think. In the meantime they seem to be faults of obscurity, that
    is, invisible faults, like those in the poetry which do not keep it
    from selling as I am so, so glad to understand. I am glad too that
    Mr. Milnes knows you a little.


    Now I must end, there is no more time to-night. God bless you, very
    dearest! Keep better ... try to be well—as I do for you since you
    ask me. Did I ever think that you would think it worth while to ask
    me that? What a dream! reaching out into the morning! To-day however
    I did not go down-stairs, because it was colder and the wind blew its
    way into the passages:—if I can to-morrow without risk, I will, ...
    be sure ... be sure. Till Thursday then!—till eternity!


    'Till when, where am I,' but with you? and what, but yours

Your       

Ba.


    I have been writing 'autographs' (save my mark) for the North and
    the South to-day ... the Fens, and Golden Square. Somebody asked for
    a verse, ... from either 'Catarina' or 'Flush' ... 'those poems' &c.
    &c.! Such a concatenation of criticisms. So I preferred Flush of
    course—i.e. gave him the preferment.


