
Wednesday Morning.
[Post-mark, March 4, 1846.]


    Ah, sweetest, don't mind people and their lies any more than I shall;
    if the toad does 'take it into his toad's head to spit at you'—you
    will not 'drop dead,' I warrant. All the same, if one may make a
    circuit through a flower-bed and see the less of his toad-habits and
    general ugliness, so much the better—no words can express my entire
    indifference (far below contempt) for what can be said or done. But
    one thing, only one, I choose to hinder being said, if I can—the
    others I would not if I could—why prevent the toad's puffing himself
    out thrice his black bigness if it amuses him among those wet stones?
    We shall be in the sun.


    I dare say I am unjust—hasty certainly, in the other matter—but all
    faults are such inasmuch as they are 'mistakes of the
    intellect'—toads may spit or leave it alone,—but if I ever see it
    right, exercising my intellect, to treat any human beings like my
    'chattels'—I shall pay for that mistake one day or another, I am
    convinced—and I very much fear that you would soon discover what one
    fault of mine is, if you were to hear anyone assert such a right in my
    presence.


    Well, I shall see you to-morrow—had I better come a little later, I
    wonder?—half-past three, for instance, staying, as last time, till
    ... ah, it is ill policy to count my treasure aloud! Or shall I come
    at the usual time to-morrow? If I do not hear, at the usual
    time!—because, I think you would—am sure you would have considered
    and suggested it, were it necessary.


    Bless you, dearest—ever your own.


    I said nothing about that Mr. Russell and his proposition—by all
    means, yes—let him do more good with that noble, pathetic 'lay'—and
    do not mind the 'burthen,' if he is peremptory—so that he duly
    specify 'by the singer'—with that precaution nothing but good can
    come of his using it.


