
Thursday.
[Post-mark, March 6, 1846.]


    Ever dearest I lose no time in writing, you see, so as to be written
    to at the soonest—and there is another reason which makes me hasten
    to write ... it is not all mercantile calculation. I want you to
    understand me.


    Now listen! I seem to understand myself: it seems to me that every
    word I ever said to you on one subject, is plainly referable to a
    class of feelings of which you could not complain ... could not. But
    this is my impression; and yours is different:—you do not
    understand, you do not see by my light, and perhaps it is natural that
    you should not, as we stand on different steps of the argument. Still
    I, who said what I did, for you, and from an absorbing consideration
    of what was best for you, cannot consent, even out of anxiety for
    your futurity, to torment you now, to vex you by a form of speech
    which you persist in translating into a want of trust in you ... (I,
    want trust in you!!) into a need of more evidence about you from
    others ... (could you say so?) and even into an indisposition on my
    part to fulfil my engagement—no, dearest dearest, it is not right of
    you. And therefore, as you have these thoughts reasonably or
    unreasonably, I shall punish you for them at once, and 'chain' you ...
    (as you wish to be chained), chain you, rivet you—do you feel how the
    little fine chain twists round and round you? do you hear the stroke
    of the riveting? and you may feel that too. Now, it is done—now,
    you are chained—Bia has finished the work—I, Ba! (observe the
    anagram!) and not a word do you say, of Prometheus, though you have
    the conscience of it all, I dare say. Well! you must be pleased, ...
    as it was 'the weight of too much liberty' which offended you: and now
    you believe, perhaps, that I trust you, love you, and look to you over
    the heads of the whole living world, without any one head needing to
    stoop; you must, if you please, because you belong to me now and
    shall believe as I choose. There's a ukase for you! Cry out ... repent
    ... and I will loose the links, and let you go again—shall it be
    'My dear Miss Barrett?'


    Seriously, you shall not think of me such things as you half said, if
    not whole said, to-day. If all men were to speak evil of you, my heart
    would speak of you the more good—that would be the one result with
    me. Do I not know you, soul to soul? should I believe that any of
    them could know you as I know you? Then for the rest, I am not afraid
    of 'toads' now, not being a child any longer. I am not inclined to
    mind, if you do not mind, what may be said about us by the
    benevolent world, nor will other reasons of a graver kind affect me
    otherwise than by the necessary pain. Therefore the whole rests with
    you—unless illness should intervene—and you will be kind and good
    (will you not?) and not think hard thoughts of me ever again—no. It
    wasn't the sense of being less than you had a right to pretend to,
    which made me speak what you disliked—for it is I who am
    'unworthy,' and not another—not certainly that other!


    I meant to write more to-night of subjects farther off us, but my
    sisters have come up-stairs and I must close my letter quickly.
    Beloved, take care of your head! Ah, do not write poems, nor read, nor
    neglect the walking, nor take that shower-bath. Will you, instead,
    try the warm bathing? Surely the experiment is worth making for a
    little while. Dearest beloved, do it for your own

Ba.


