
Friday Evening.
[Post-mark, March 7, 1846.]


    Always you, is it, who torments me? always you? Well! I agree to
    bear the torments as Socrates his persecution by the potters:—and by
    the way he liked those potters, as Plato shows, and was fain to go to
    them for his illustrations ... as I to you for all my light. Also,
    while we are on the subject, I will tell you another fault of your
    Bartoli ... his 'choice Tuscan' filled one of my pages, in the place
    of my English better than Tuscan.


    For the letter you mentioned, I meant to have said in mine yesterday,
    that I was grateful to you for telling me of it—that was one of the
    prodigalities of your goodness to me ... not thrown away, in one
    sense, however superfluous. Do you ever think how I must feel when you
    overcome me with all this generous tenderness, only beloved! I cannot
    say it.


    Because it is colder to-day I have not been down-stairs but let
    to-morrow be warm enough—facilis descensus. There's something
    infernal to me really, in the going down, and now too that our cousin
    is here! Think of his beginning to attack Henrietta the other day....
    'So Mr. C. has retired and left the field to Surtees Cook. Oh ...
    you needn't deny ... it's the news of all the world except your
    father. And as to him, I don't blame you—he never will consent to
    the marriage of son or daughter. Only you should consider, you know,
    because he won't leave you a shilling, &c. &c....' You hear the sort
    of man. And then in a minute after ... 'And what is this about Ba?'
    'About Ba' said my sisters, 'why who has been persuading you of such
    nonsense?' 'Oh, my authority is very good,—perfectly unnecessary for
    you to tell any stories, Arabel,—a literary friendship, is it?' ...
    and so on ... after that fashion! This comes from my brothers of
    course, but we need not be afraid of its passing beyond, I think,
    though I was a good deal vexed when I heard first of it last night and
    have been in cousinly anxiety ever since to get our Orestes safe away
    from those Furies his creditors, into Brittany again. He is an
    intimate friend of my brothers besides the relationship, and they talk
    to him as to each other, only they oughtn't to have talked that, and
    without knowledge too.


    I forgot to tell you that Mr. Kenyon was in an immoderate joy the day
    I saw him last, about Mr. Poe's 'Raven' as seen in the Athenæum
    extracts, and came to ask what I knew of the poet and his poetry, and
    took away the book. It's the rhythm which has taken him with 'glamour'
    I fancy. Now you will stay on Monday till the last moment, and go to
    him for dinner at six.


    Who 'looked in at the door?' Nobody. But Arabel a little way opened
    it, and hearing your voice, went back. There was no harm—is no fear
    of harm. Nobody in the house would find his or her pleasure in running
    the risk of giving me pain. I mean my brothers and sisters would not.


    Are you trying the music to charm the brain to stillness? Tell me. And
    keep from that 'Soul's Tragedy' which did so much harm—oh, that I had
    bound you by some Stygian oath not to touch it.


    So my rock ... may the birds drop into your crevices the seeds of all
    the flowers of the world—only it is not for those, that I cling to
    you as the single rock in the salt sea.

Ever I am          

Your own.


