
Tuesday Morning.
[Post-mark, March 10, 1846.]


    Now I shall know what to believe when you talk of very bad and very
    indifferent doings of yours. Dearest, I read your 'Soul's Tragedy'
    last night and was quite possessed with it, and fell finally into a
    mute wonder how you could for a moment doubt about publishing it. It
    is very vivid, I think, and vital, and impressed me more than the
    first act of 'Luria' did, though I do not mean to compare such
    dissimilar things, and for pure nobleness 'Luria' is
    unapproachable—will prove so, it seems to me. But this 'Tragedy'
    shows more heat from the first, and then, the words beat down more
    closely ... well! I am struck by it all as you see. If you keep it up
    to this passion, if you justify this high key-note, it is a great
    work, and worthy of a place next 'Luria.' Also do observe how
    excellently balanced the two will be, and how the tongue of this next
    silver Bell will swing from side to side. And you to frighten me
    about it. Yes, and the worst is (because it was stupid in me) the
    worst is that I half believed you and took the manuscript to be
    something inferior—for you—and the adviseableness of its
    publication, a doubtful case. And yet, after all, the really worst is,
    that you should prove yourself such an adept at deceiving! For can it
    be possible that the same

'Robert Browning'
who (I heard the other day) said once that he could 'wait three
    hundred years,' should not feel the life of centuries in this work
    too—can it be? Why all the pulses of the life of it are beating in
    even my ears!


    Tell me, beloved, how you are—I shall hear it to-night—shall I not?
    To think of your being unwell, and forced to go here and go there to
    visit people to whom your being unwell falls in at best among the
    secondary evils!—makes me discontented—which is one shade more to
    the uneasiness I feel. Will you take care, and not give away your life
    to these people? Because I have a better claim than they ... and shall
    put it in, if provoked ... shall. Then you will not use the
    shower-bath again—you promise? I dare say Mr. Kenyon observed
    yesterday how unwell you were looking—tell me if he didn't! Now do
    not work, dearest! Do not think of Chiappino, leave him behind ... he
    has a good strong life of his own, and can wait for you. Oh—but let
    me remember to say of him, that he and the other personages appear to
    me to articulate with perfect distinctness and clearness ... you need
    not be afraid of having been obscure in this first part. It is all as
    lucid as noon.


    Shall I go down-stairs to-day? 'No' say the privy-councillors,
    'because it is cold,' but I shall go peradventure, because the sun
    brightens and brightens, and the wind has gone round to the west.


    George had come home yesterday before you left me, but the stars were
    favourable to us and kept him out of this room. Now he is at
    Worcester—went this morning, on those never ending 'rounds,' poor
    fellow, which weary him I am sure.


    And why should music and the philosophy of it make you 'melancholy,'
    ever dearest, more than the other arts, which each has the seal of the
    age, modifying itself after a fashion and to one? Because it changes
    more, perhaps. Yet all the Arts are mediators between the soul and the
    Infinite, ... shifting always like a mist, between the Breath on this
    side, and the Light on that side ... shifted and coloured; mediators,
    messengers, projected from the Soul, to go and feel, for Her, out
    there!


    You don't call me 'kind' I confess—but then you call me 'too kind'
    which is nearly as bad, you must allow on your part. Only you were not
    in earnest when you said that, as it appeared afterward. Were you,
    yesterday, in pretending to think that I owed you nothing ... I?


    May God bless you. He knows that to give myself to you, is not to pay
    you. Such debts are not so paid.

Yet I am your
Ba.


    People's Journal for March 7th.


