
Tuesday Evening.
[Post-mark, March 11, 1846.]


    You find my letter I trust, for it was written this morning in time;
    and if these two lines should not be flattery ... oh, rank flattery!
    ... why happy letter is it, to help to bring you home ten minutes
    earlier, when you never ought to have left home—no, indeed! I knew
    how it would be yesterday, and how you would be worse and not better.
    You are not fit to go out, dear dearest, to sit in the glare of lights
    and talk and listen, and have the knives and forks to rattle all the
    while and remind you of the chains of necessity. Oh—should I bear it,
    do you think? I was thinking, when you went away—after you had
    quite gone. You would laugh to see me at my dinner—Flush and
    me—Flush placing in me such an heroic confidence, that, after he has
    cast one discriminating glance on the plate, and, in the case of
    'chicken,' wagged his tail with an emphasis, ... he goes off to the
    sofa, shuts his eyes and allows a full quarter of an hour to pass
    before he returns to take his share. Did you ever hear of a dog before
    who did not persecute one with beseeching eyes at mealtimes? And
    remember, this is not the effect of discipline. Also if another than
    myself happens to take coffee or break bread in the room here, he
    teazes straightway with eyes and paws, ... teazes like a common dog
    and is put out of the door before he can be quieted by scolding. But
    with me he is sublime! Moreover he has been a very useful dog in his
    time (in the point of capacity), causing to disappear supererogatory
    dinners and impossible breakfasts which, to do him justice, is a feat
    accomplished without an objection on his side, always.


    So, when you write me such a letter, I write back to you about Flush.
    Dearest beloved, but I have read the letter and felt it in my heart,
    through and through! and it is as wise to talk of Flush foolishly, as
    to fancy that I could say how it is felt ... this letter! Only when
    you spoke last of breaking off with such and such recollections, it
    was the melancholy of the breaking off which I protested against, was
    it not? and not the insufficiency of the recollections. There might
    have been something besides in jest. Ah, but you remember, if you
    please, that I was the first to wish (wishing for my own part, if I
    could wish exclusively) to break off in the middle the silken thread,
    and you told me, not—you forbade me—do you remember? For, as
    happiness goes, the recollections were enough, ... are enough for
    me! I mean that I should acknowledge them to be full compensation
    for the bitter gift of life, such as it was, to me! if that
    subject-matter were broken off here! 'Bona verba' let me speak
    nevertheless. You mean, you say, to run all risks with me, and I don't
    mean to draw back from my particular risk of ... what am I to do to
    you hereafter to make you vexed with me? What is there in marriage to
    make all these people on every side of us, (who all began, I suppose,
    by talking of love,) look askance at one another from under the silken
    mask ... and virtually hate one another through the tyranny of the
    stronger and the hypocrisy of the weaker party. It never could be so
    with us—I know that. But you grow awful to me sometimes with the
    very excess of your goodness and tenderness, and still, I think to
    myself, if you do not keep lifting me up quite off the ground by the
    strong faculty of love in you, I shall not help falling short of the
    hope you have placed in me—it must be 'supernatural' of you, to the
    end! or I fall short and disappoint you. Consider this, beloved. Now
    if I could put my soul out of my body, just to stand up before you
    and make it clear.


    I did go to the drawing-room to-day ... would ... should ... did. The
    sun came out, the wind changed ... where was the obstacle? I spent a
    quarter of an hour in a fearful solitude, listening for knocks at the
    door, as a ghost-fearer might at midnight, and 'came home' none the
    worse in any way. Be sure that I shall 'take care' better than you do,
    and there, is the worst of it all—for you let people make you ill,
    and do it yourself upon occasion.


    You know from my letter how I found you out in the matter of the
    'Soul's Tragedy.' Oh! so bad ... so weak, so unworthy of your name! If
    some other people were half a quarter as much the contrary!


    And so, good-night, dear dearest. In spite of my fine speeches about
    'recollections,' I should be unhappy enough to please you, with only
    those ... without you beside! I could not take myself back from being

Your own—


