
[Post-mark, March 11, 1846.]


    Dear, dear Ba, but indeed I did return home earlier by two or three
    good hours than the night before—and to find no letter,—none of
    yours! That was reserved for this morning early, and then a rest
    came, a silence, over the thoughts of you—and now again, comes this
    last note! Oh, my love—why—what is it you think to do, or become
    'afterward,' that you may fail in and so disappoint me? It is not very
    unfit that you should thus punish yourself, and that, sinning by your
    own ambition of growing something beyond my Ba even, you should 'fear'
    as you say! For, sweet, why wish, why think to alter ever by a line,
    change by a shade, turn better if that were possible, and so only rise
    the higher above me, get further from instead of nearer to my heart?
    What I expect, what I build my future on, am quite, quite prepared to
    'risk' everything for,—is that one belief that you will not alter,
    will just remain as you are—meaning by 'you,' the love in you, the
    qualities I have known (for you will stop me, if I do not stop
    myself) what I have evidence of in every letter, in every word, every
    look. Keeping these, if it be God's will that the body passes,—what
    is that? Write no new letters, speak no new words, look no new
    looks,—only tell me, years hence that the present is alive, that what
    was once, still is—and I am, must needs be, blessed as ever! You
    speak of my feeling as if it were a pure speculation—as if because I
    see somewhat in you I make a calculation that there must be more to
    see somewhere or other—where bdellium is found, the onyx-stone may be
    looked for in the mystic land of the four rivers! And perhaps ... ah,
    poor human nature!—perhaps I do think at times on what may be to
    find! But what is that to you? I offer for the bdellium—the other
    may be found or not found ... what I see glitter on the ground, that
    will suffice to make me rich as—rich as—


    So bless you my own Ba! I would not wait for paper, and you must
    forgive half-sheets, instead of a whole celestial quire to my love and
    praise. Are you so well? So adventurous? Thank you from my heart of
    hearts. And I am quite well to-day (and have received a note from
    Procter just this minute putting off his dinner on account of the
    death of his wife's sister's husband abroad). Observe this sheet I
    take as I find—I mean, that the tear tells of no improper speech
    repented of—what English, what sense, what a soul's tragedy! but
    then, what real, realest love and more than love for my ever dearest
    Ba possesses her own—


