
[Post-mark, March 12, 1846.]


    When my Orpheus writes 'Περι λιθων' he makes a great mistake
    about onyxes—there is more true onyx in this letter of his that I
    have just read, than he will ever find in the desert land he goes to.
    And for what 'glitters on the ground,' it reminds me of the yellow
    metal sparks found in the Malvern Hills, and how we used to laugh
    years ago at one of our geological acquaintances, who looked
    mole-hills up that mountain-range in the scorn of his eyes, saying ...
    'Nothing but mica!!' Is anybody to be rich through 'mica', I wonder?
    through 'Nothing but mica?' 'As rich as—as rich as' ... Walter the
    Pennyless?


    Dearest, best you are nevertheless, and it is a sorry jest which I can
    break upon your poverty, with that golden heart of yours so
    apprehended of mine! Why if I am 'ambitious'—is it not because you
    love me as if I were worthier of your love, and that, so, I get
    frightened of the opening of your eyelids to the unworthiness? 'A
    little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
    sleep'—there, is my 'ambition for afterward.' Oh—you do not
    understand how with an unspeakable wonder, an astonishment which keeps
    me from drawing breath, I look to this Dream, and 'see your face as
    the face of an angel,' and fear for the vanishing, ... because dreams
    and angels do pass away in this world. But you, I understand
    you, and all your goodness past expression, past belief of mine, if
    I had not known you ... just you. If it will satisfy you that I
    should know you, love you, love you—why then indeed—because I never
    bowed down to any of the false gods I know the gold from the mica, ...
    I! 'My own beloved'—you should have my soul to stand on if it could
    make you stand higher. Yet you shall not call me 'ambitious.'


    To-day I went down-stairs again, and wished to know whether you were
    walking in your proportion—and your letter does call you 'better,'
    whether you walked enough or not, and it bears the Deptford post-mark.
    On Saturday I shall see how you are looking. So pale you were last
    time! I know Mr. Kenyon must have observed it, (dear Mr. Kenyon ...
    for being 'kinder and kindest') and that one of the 'augurs'
    marvelled at the other! By the way I forgot yesterday to tell you how
    Mr. Burges's 'apt remark' did amuse me. And Mr. Kenyon who said much
    the same words to me last week in relation to this very Wordsworth
    junior, writhed, I am sure, and wished the ingenious observer with the
    lost plays of Æschylus—oh, I seem to see Mr. Kenyon's face! He was to
    have come to tell me how you all behaved at dinner that day, but he
    keeps away ... you have given him too much to think of perhaps.


    I heard from Miss Mitford to-day that Mr. Chorley's hope is at an end
    in respect to the theatre, and (I must tell you) she praises him
    warmly for his philosophy and fortitude under the disappointment. How
    much philosophy does it take,—please to instruct me,—in order to the
    decent bearing of such disasters? Can I fancy one, shorter than you by
    a whole head of the soul, condescending to 'bear' such things? No,
    indeed.


    Be good and kind, and do not work at the 'Tragedy' ... do not.


    So you and I have written out all the paper in London! At least, I
    send and send in vain to have more envelopes 'after my kind,' and the
    last answer is, that a 'fresh supply will arrive in eight days from
    Paris, and that in the meanwhile they are quite out in the article.'
    An awful sign of the times, is this famine of envelopes ... not to
    speak of the scarcity of little sheets:—and the augurs look to it all
    of course.


    For my part I think more of Chiappino—Chiappino holds me fast.


    But I must let you go—it is too late. This dearest letter, which
    you sent me! I thank you for it with ever so much dumbness. May God
    bless you and keep you, and make you happy for me.

Your Ba.

