
[Post-mark, March 12, 1846.]


    How I get to understand this much of Law—that prior possession is
    nine points of it! Just because your infinite adroitness got first
    hold of the point of view whence our connection looks like 'a dream'
    ... I find myself shut out of my very own, unable to say what is
    oftenest in my thought; whereas the dear, miraculous dream you were,
    and are, my Ba! Only, vanish—that you will never! My own, and for
    ever!


    Yesterday I read the poor, inconceivably inadequate notice in the
    People's Journal. How curiously wrong, too, in the personal guesses!
    Sad work truly. For my old friend Mrs. Adams—no, I must be silent:
    the lyrics seem doggerel in its utter purity. And so the people are to
    be instructed in the new age of gold! I heard two days ago precisely
    what I told you—that there was a quarrel, &c. which this service was
    to smooth over, no doubt. Chorley told me, in a hasty word only, that
    all was over, Mr. Webster would not have anything to do with his play.
    The said W. is one of the poorest of poor creatures, and as Chorley
    was certainly forewarned, forearmed I will hope him to have been
    likewise—still it is very disappointing—he was apparently nearer
    than most aspirants to the prize,—having the best will of the
    actresses on whose shoulder the burthen was to lie. I hope they have
    been quite honest with him—knowing as I do the easy process of
    transferring all sorts of burthens, in that theatrical world, from
    responsible to irresponsible members of it, actors to manager, manager
    to actors, as the case requires. And it is a 'hope deferred' with
    Chorley; not for the second or third time. I am very glad that he
    cares no more than you tell me.


    Still you go down-stairs, and still return safely, and every step
    leads us nearer to my 'hope.' How unremittingly you bless me—a
    visit promises a letter, a letter brings such news, crowns me with
    such words, and speaks of another visit—and so the golden links
    extend. Dearest words, dearest letters—as I add each to my heap, I
    say—I do say—'I was poor, it now seems, a minute ago, when I had
    not this!' Bless you, dear, dear Ba. On Saturday I shall be with
    you, I trust—may God bless you! Ever your own


