
Sunday.
[Post-mark, March 16, 1846.]


    Ever dearest I am going to say one word first of all lest I should
    forget it afterward, of the two or three words which you said
    yesterday and so passingly that you probably forget to-day having said
    them at all. We were speaking of Mr. Chorley and his house, and you
    said that you did not care for such and such things for yourself, but
    that for others—now you remember the rest. And I just want to say
    what it would have been simpler to have said at the time—only not so
    easy—(I couldn't say it at the time) that you are not if you please
    to fancy that because I am a woman I have not the pretension to do
    with as little in any way as you yourself ... no, it is not that I
    mean to say.... I mean that you are not, if you please, to fancy that,
    because I am a woman, I look to be cared for in those outside things,
    or should have the slightest pleasure in any of them. So never wish
    nor regret in your thoughts to be able or not to be able to care this
    and this for me; for while you are thinking so, our thoughts go
    different ways, which is wrong. Mr. Fox did me a great deal too much
    honour in calling me 'a religious hermit'; he was 'curiously' in
    fault, as you saw. It is not my vocation to sit on a stone in a
    cave—I was always too fond of lolling upon sofas or in chairs nearly
    as large,—and this, which I sit in, was given to me when I was a
    child by my uncle, the uncle I spoke of to you once, and has been
    lolled in nearly ever since ... when I was well enough. Well—that
    is a sort of luxury, of course—but it is more idle than expensive, as
    a habit, and I do believe that it is the 'head and foot of my
    offending' in that matter. Yes—'confiteor tibi' besides, that I do
    hate white dimity curtains, which is highly improper for a religious
    hermit of course, but excusable in me who would accept brown serge
    as a substitute with ever so much indifference. It is the white light
    which comes in the dimity which is so hateful to me. To 'go mad in
    white dimity' seems perfectly natural, and consequential even. Set
    aside these foibles, and one thing is as good as another with me, and
    the more simplicity in the way of living, the better. If I saw Mr.
    Chorley's satin sofas and gilded ceilings I should call them very
    pretty I dare say, but never covet the possession of the like—it
    would never enter my mind to do so. Then Papa has not kept a carriage
    since I have been grown up (they grumble about it here in the house,
    but when people have once had great reverses they get nervous about
    spending money) so I shall not miss the Clarence and greys ... and I
    do entreat you not to put those two ideas together again of me and
    the finery which has nothing to do with me. I have talked a great deal
    too much of all this, you will think, but I want you, once for all, to
    apply it broadly to the whole of the future both in the general view
    and the details, so that we need not return to the subject. Judge for
    me as for yourself—what is good for you is good for me. Otherwise I
    shall be humiliated, you know; just as far as I know your thoughts.


    Mr. Kenyon has been here to-day—and I have been down-stairs—two
    great events! He was in brilliant spirits and sate talking ever so
    long, and named you as he always does. Something he asked, and then
    said suddenly ... 'But I don't see why I should ask you, when I
    ought to know him better than you can.' On which I was wise enough to
    change colour, as I felt, to the roots of my hair. There is the
    effect of a bad conscience! and it has happened to me before, with Mr.
    Kenyon, three times—once particularly, when I could have cried with
    vexation (to complete the effects!), he looked at me with such
    infinite surprise in a dead pause of any speaking. That was in the
    summer; and all to be said for it now, is, that it couldn't be helped:
    couldn't!


    Mr. Kenyon asked of 'Saul.' (By the way, you never answered about the
    blue lilies.) He asked of 'Saul' and whether it would be finished in
    the new number. He hangs on the music of your David. Did you read in
    the Athenæum how Jules Janin—no, how the critic on Jules Janin (was
    it the critic? was it Jules Janin? the glorious confusion is gaining
    on me I think) has magnificently confounded places and persons in
    Robert Southey's urn by the Adriatic and devoted friendship for Lord
    Byron? And immediately the English observer of the phenomenon, after
    moralizing a little on the crass ignorance of Frenchmen in respect to
    our literature, goes on to write like an ignoramus himself, on Mme.
    Charles Reybaud, encouraging that pure budding novelist, who is in
    fact a hack writer of romances third and fourth rate, of questionable
    purity enough, too. It does certainly appear wonderful that we should
    not sufficiently stand abreast here in Europe, to justify and
    necessitate the establishment of an European review—journal
    rather—(the 'Foreign Review,' so called, touching only the summits of
    the hills) a journal which might be on a level with the intelligent
    readers of all the countries of Europe, and take all the rising
    reputations of each, with the national light on them as they rise,
    into observation and judgment. If nobody can do this, it is a pity I
    think to do so much less—both in France and England—to snatch up a
    French book from over the Channel as ever and anon they do in the
    Athenæum, and say something prodigiously absurd of it, till people
    cry out 'oh oh' as in the House of Commons.


    Oh—oh—and how wise I am to-day, as if I were a critic myself!
    Yesterday I was foolish instead—for I couldn't get out of my head all
    the evening how you said that you would come 'to see a candle held up
    at the window.' Well! but I do not mean to love you any more just
    now—so I tell you plainly. Certainly I will not. I love you already
    too much perhaps. I feel like the turning Dervishes turning in the sun
    when you say such words to me—and I never shall love you any
    'less,' because it is too much to be made less of.


    And you write to-morrow? and will tell me how you are? honestly will
    tell me? May God bless you, most dear!

I am yours—'Tota tua est'
Ba.


