
Sunday.
[Post-mark, March 16, 1846.]


    How will the love my heart is full of for you, let me be silent?
    Insufficient speech is better than no speech, in one regard—the
    speaker had tried words, and if they fail, hereafter he needs not
    reflect that he did not even try—so with me now, that loving you, Ba,
    with all my heart and soul, all my senses being lost in one wide
    wondering gratitude and veneration, I press close to you to say so, in
    this imperfect way, my dear dearest beloved! Why do you not help me,
    rather than take my words, my proper word, from me and call them
    yours, when yours they are not? You said lately love of you 'made you
    humble'—just as if to hinder me from saying that earnest
    truth!—entirely true it is, as I feel ever more convincingly. You do
    not choose to understand it should be so, nor do I much care, for the
    one thing you must believe, must resolve to believe in its length and
    breadth, is that I do love you and live only in the love of you.


    I will rest on the confidence that you do so believe! You know by
    this that it is no shadowy image of you and not you, which having
    attached myself to in the first instance, I afterward compelled my
    fancy to see reproduced, so to speak, with tolerable exactness to the
    original idea, in you, the dearest real you I am blessed with—you
    know what the eyes are to me, and the lips and the hair. And I, for
    my part, know now, while fresh from seeing you, certainly know,
    whatever I may have said a short time since, that you will go on to
    the end, that the arm round me will not let me go,—over such a blind
    abyss—I refuse to think, to fancy, towards what it would be to
    loose you now! So I give my life, my soul into your hand—the giving
    is a mere form too, it is yours, ever yours from the first—but ever
    as I see you, sit with you, and come away to think over it all, I find
    more that seems mine to give; you give me more life and it goes back
    to you.


    I shall hear from you to-morrow—then, I will go out early and get
    done with some calls, in the joy and consciousness of what waits me,
    and when I return I will write a few words. Are these letters, these
    merest attempts at getting to talk with you through the distance—yet
    always with the consolation of feeling that you will know all,
    interpret all and forgive it and put it right—can such things be
    cared for, expected, as you say? Then, Ba, my life must be better
    ... with the closeness to help, and the 'finding out the way' for
    which love was always noted. If you begin making in fancy a lover to
    your mind, I am lost at once—but the one quality of affection for
    you, which would sooner or later have to be placed on his list of
    component graces; that I will dare start supply—the entire love you
    could dream of is here. You think you see some of the other
    adornments, and only too many; and you will see plainer one day, but
    with that I do not concern myself—you shall admire the true
    heroes—but me you shall love for the love's sake. Let me kiss you,
    you, my dearest, dearest—God bless you ever—


