
Monday Evening.
[Post-mark, March 17, 1846.]


    Dearest, you are dearest always! Talk of Sirens, ... there must be
    some masculine ones 'rari nantes,' I fancy, (though we may not find
    them in unquestionable authorities like your Ælian!) to justify this
    voice I hear. Ah, how you speak, with that pretension, too, to
    dumbness! What should people be made of, in order to bear such words,
    do you think? Will all the wax from all the altar-candles in the
    Sistine Chapel, keep the piercing danger from their ears? Being tied
    up a good deal tighter than Ulysses did not save me. Dearest
    dearest: I laugh, you see, as usual, not to cry! But deep down, deeper
    than the Sirens go, deep underneath the tides, there, I bless and
    love you with the voice that makes no sound.


    Other human creatures (how often I do think it to myself!) have their
    good things scattered over their lives, sown here and sown there, down
    the slopes, and by the waysides. But with me ... I have mine all
    poured down on one spot in the midst of the sands!—if you knew what I
    feel at moments, and at half-hours, when I give myself up to the
    feeling freely and take no thought of red eyes. A woman once was
    killed with gifts, crushed with the weight of golden bracelets thrown
    at her: and, knowing myself, I have wondered more than a little, how
    it was that I could bear this strange and unused gladness, without
    sinking as the emotion rose. Only I was incredulous at first, and the
    day broke slowly ... and the gifts fell like the rain ... softly; and
    God gives strength, by His providence, for sustaining blessings as
    well as stripes. Dearest—


    For the rest I understand you perfectly—perfectly. It was simply to
    your thoughts, that I replied ... and that you need not say to
    yourself any more, as you did once to me when you brought me flowers,
    that you wished they were diamonds. It was simply to prevent the
    accident of such a thought, that I spoke out mine. You would not
    wish accidentally that you had a double-barrelled gun to give me, or a
    cardinal's hat, or a snuff box, and I meant to say that you might as
    well—as diamonds and satin sofas à la Chorley. Thoughts are
    something, and your thoughts are something more. To be sure they
    are!


    You are better you say, which makes me happy of course. And you will
    not make the 'better' worse again by doing wrong things—that is my
    petition. It was the excess of goodness to write those two letters for
    me in one day, and I thank you, thank you. Beloved, when you write,
    let it be, if you choose, ever so few lines. Do not suffer me (for
    my own sake) to tire you, because two lines or three bring you to me
    ... remember ... just as a longer letter would.


    But where, pray, did I say, and when, that 'everything would end
    well?' Was that in the dream, when we two met on the stairs? I did
    not really say so I think. And 'well' is how you understand it. If you
    jump out of the window you succeed in getting to the ground, somehow,
    dead or alive ... but whether that means 'ending well,' depends on
    your way of considering matters. I am seriously of opinion
    nevertheless, that if 'the arm,' you talk of, drops, it will not be
    for weariness nor even for weakness, but because it is cut off at the
    shoulder. I will not fail to you,—may God so deal with me, so bless
    me, so leave me, as I live only for you and shall. Do you doubt
    that, my only beloved! Ah, you know well—too well, people would
    say ... but I do not think it 'too well' myself, ... knowing you.

Your        

Ba.


    Here is a gossip which Mr. Kenyon brought me on Sunday—disbelieving
    it himself, he asseverated, though Lady Chantrey said it 'with
    authority,'—that Mr. Harness had offered his hand heart and
    ecclesiastical dignities to Miss Burdett Coutts. It is Lady Chantrey's
    and Mr. Kenyon's secret, remember.


    And ... will you tell me? How can a man spend four or five successive
    months on the sea, most cheaply—at the least pecuniary expense, I
    mean? Because Miss Mitford's friend Mr. Buckingham is ordered by his
    medical adviser to complete his cure by these means; and he is not
    rich. Could he go with sufficient comfort by a merchant's vessel to
    the Mediterranean ... and might he drift about among the Greek
    islands?


