
Tuesday.


    'Out of window' would be well, as I see the leap, if it ended (so far
    as I am concerned) in the worst way imaginable—I would I 'run the
    risk' (Ba's other word) rationally, deliberately,—knowing what the
    ordinary law of chances in this world justifies in such a case; and if
    the result after all was unfortunate, it would be far easier to
    undergo the extremest penalty with so little to reproach myself
    for,—than to put aside the adventure,—waive the wondrous probability
    of such best fortune, in a fear of the barest possibility of an
    adverse event, and so go to my grave, Walter the Penniless, with an
    eternal recollection that Miss Burdett Coutts once offered to wager
    sundry millions with me that she could throw double-sixes a dozen
    times running—which wager I wisely refused to accept because it was
    not written in the stars that such a sequence might never be. I had
    rather, rather a thousand-fold lose my paltry stake, and be the one
    recorded victim to such an unexampled unluckiness that half a dozen
    mad comets, suns gone wrong, and lunatic moons must have come
    laboriously into conjunction for my special sake to bring it to pass,
    which were no slight honour, properly considered!—And this is my
    way of laughing, dearest Ba, when the excess of belief in you, and
    happiness with you, runs over and froths if it don't
    sparkle—underneath is a deep, a sea not to be moved. But chance,
    chance! there is no chance here! I have gained enough for my life,
    I can only put in peril the gaining more than enough. You shall change
    altogether my dear, dearest love, and I will be happy to the last
    minute on what I can remember of this past year—I could do that.
    Now, jump with me out, Ba! If you feared for yourself—all would be
    different, sadly different—But saying what you do say, promising 'the
    strength of arm'—do not wonder that I call it an assurance of all
    being 'well'! All is best, as you promise—dear, darling Ba!—and I
    say, in my degree, with all the energy of my nature, as you say,
    promise as you promise—only meaning a worship of you that is solely
    fit for me, fit by position—are not you my 'mistress?' Come, some
    good out of those old conventions, in which you lost faith after the
    Bower's disappearance, (it was carried by the singing angels, like the
    house at Loretto, to the Siren's isle where we shall find it preserved
    in a beauty 'very rare and absolute')—is it not right you should be
    my Lady, my Queen? and you are, and ever must be, dear Ba. Because I
    am suffered to kiss the lips, shall I ever refuse to embrace the feet?
    and kiss lips, and embrace feet, love you wholly, my Ba! May God
    bless you—

Ever your own,
R.


    It would be easy for Mr. Buckingham to find a Merchant-ship bound for
    some Mediterranean port, after a week or two in harbour, to another
    and perhaps a third—Naples, Palermo, Syra, Constantinople, and so on.
    The expense would be very trifling, but the want of comfort enormous
    for an invalid—the one advantage is the solitariness of the one
    passenger among all those rough new creatures. I like it much, and
    soon get deep into their friendship, but another has other ways of
    viewing matters. No one article provided by the ship in the way of
    provisions can anybody touch. Mr. B. must lay in his own stock, and
    the horrors of dirt and men's ministry are portentous, yet by a little
    arrangement beforehand much might be done. Still, I only know my own
    powers of endurance, and counsel nobody to gain my experience. On the
    other hand, were all to do again, I had rather have seen Venice so,
    with the five or six weeks' absolute rest of the mind's eyes, than any
    other imaginable way,—except Balloon-travelling.


    Do you think they meant Landor's 'Count Julian'—the 'subject of his
    tragedy' sure enough,—and that he was the friend of Southey? So it
    struck me—


