
[Post-mark, March 21, 1846.]


    I do not understand how my letters limp so instead of flying as they
    ought with the feathers I give them, and how you did not receive last
    night, nor even early this morning, what left me at two o'clock
    yesterday. But I understand now the not hearing from you—you were
    not well. Not well, not well ... that is always 'happening' at
    least. And Mr. Moxon, who is to have his first sheet, whether you are
    well or ill! It is wrong ... yes, very wrong—and if one point of
    wrongness is touched, we shall not easily get right again—as I think
    mournfully, feeling confident (call me Cassandra, but I cannot jest
    about it) feeling certain that it will end (the means being so
    persisted in) by some serious illness—serious sorrow,—on yours and
    my part.


    As to Monday, Mr. Kenyon said he would come again on Sunday—in which
    case, Monday will be clear. If he should not come on Sunday, he will
    or may on Monday,—yet—oh, in every case, perhaps you can come on
    Monday—there will be no time to let you know of Mr. Kenyon—and
    probably we shall be safe, and your being in town seems to fix the
    day. For myself I am well enough, and the wind has changed, which will
    make me better—this cold weather oppresses and weakens me, but it is
    close to April and can't last and won't last—it is warmer already.
    Beware of the notes! They are not Ba's—except for the insolence, nor
    EBB's—because of the carelessness. If I had known, moreover, that you
    were going to Moxon's on Monday, they should have gone to the fire
    rather than provoked you into superfluous work for the short interval.
    Just so much are they despised of both EBB and Ba.


    I am glad I did not hear from you yesterday because you were not
    well, and you must never write when you are not well. But if you had
    been quite well, should I have heard?—I doubt it. You meant me to
    hear from you only once, from Thursday to Monday. Is it not the truth
    now that you hate writing to me?


    The Athenæum takes up the 'Tales from Boccaccio' as if they were
    worth it, and imputes in an underground way the authorship to the
    members of the 'coterie' so called—do you observe that? There is an
    implication that persons named in the poem wrote the poem themselves.
    And upon whom does the critic mean to fix the song of 'Constancy'
    ... the song which is 'not to puzzle anybody' who knows the tunes of
    the song-writers! The perfection of commonplace it seems to me. It
    might have been written by the 'poet Bunn.' Don't you think so?


    While I write this you are in town, but you will not read it till
    Sunday unless I am more fortunate than usual. On Monday then! And no
    word before? No—I shall be sure not to hear to-night. Now do try not
    to suffer through 'Luria.' Let Mr. Moxon wait a week rather. There is
    time enough.

Ever your
Ba.


