
Sunday.
[Post-mark, March 23, 1846.]


    Oh, my Ba—how you shall hear of this to-morrow—that is all: I hate
    writing? See when presently I only write to you daily, hourly if you
    let me? Just this now—I will be with you to-morrow in any case—I
    can go away at once, if need be, or stay—if you like you can stop
    me by sending a note for me to Moxon's before 10 o'clock—if
    anything calls for such a measure.


    Now briefly,—I am unwell and entirely irritated with this sad
    'Luria'—I thought it a failure at first, I find it infinitely worse
    than I thought—it is a pure exercise of cleverness, even where most
    successful; clever attempted reproduction of what was conceived by
    another faculty, and foolishly let pass away. If I go on, even hurry
    the more to get on, with the printing,—it is to throw out and away
    from me the irritating obstruction once and forever. I have corrected
    it, cut it down, and it may stand and pledge me to doing better
    hereafter. I say, too, in excuse to myself, unlike the woman at her
    spinning-wheel, 'He thought of his flax on the whole far more than
    of his singing'—more of his life's sustainment, of dear, dear Ba he
    hates writing to, than of these wooden figures—no wonder all is as it
    is?


    Here is a pure piece of the old Chorley leaven for you, just as it
    reappears ever and anon and throws one back on the mistrust all but
    abandoned! Chorley knows I have not seen that Powell for nearly
    fifteen months—that I never heard of the book till it reached me in a
    blank cover—that I never contributed a line or word to it directly or
    indirectly—and I should think he also knows that all the sham
    learning, notes &c., all that saves the book from the deepest deep of
    contempt, was contributed by Heraud (a regular critic in the
    'Athenæum'), who received his pay for the same: he knows I never
    spoke in my life to 'Jones or Stephens'—that there is no 'coterie' of
    which I can, by any extension of the word, form a part—that I am in
    this case at the mercy of a wretched creature who to get into my
    favour again (to speak the plain truth) put in the gross, disgusting
    flattery in the notes—yet Chorley, knowing this, none so well, and
    what the writer's end is—(to have it supposed I, and the others
    named—Talfourd, for instance—are his friends and helpers)—he
    condescends to further it by such a notice, written with that
    observable and characteristic duplicity, that to poor gross stupid
    Powell it shall look like an admiring 'Oh, fie—so clever but so
    wicked'!—a kind of D'Orsay's praise—while to the rest of his
    readers, a few depreciatory epithets—slight sneers convey his real
    sentiments, he trusts! And this he does, just because Powell buys an
    article of him once a quarter and would expect notice. I think I
    hear Chorley—'You know, I cannot praise such a book—it is too
    bad'—as if, as if—oh, it makes one sicker than having written
    'Luria,' there's one comfort! I shall call on Chorley and ask for
    his account of the matter. Meantime nobody will read his foolish
    notice without believing as he and Powell desire! Bless you, my own
    Ba—to-morrow makes amends to R.B.


