
Tuesday.
[Post-mark, March 24, 1846.]


    How ungrateful I was to your flowers yesterday, never looking at them
    nor praising them till they were put away, and yourself gone away—and
    that was your fault, be it remembered, because you began to tell
    me of the good news from Moxon's, and, in the joy of it, I missed the
    flowers ... for the nonce, you know. Afterward they had their due, and
    all the more that you were not there. My first business when you are
    out of the room and the house, and the street perhaps, is to arrange
    the flowers and to gather out of them all the thoughts you leave
    between the leaves and at the end of the stalks. And shall I tell you
    what happened, not yesterday, but the Thursday before? no, it was the
    Friday morning, when I found, or rather Wilson found and held up from
    my chair, a bunch of dead blue violets. Quite dead they seemed! You
    had dropped them and I had sate on them, and where we murdered them
    they had lain, poor things, all the night through. And Wilson thought
    it the vainest of labours when she saw me set about reviving them,
    cutting the stalks afresh, and dipping them head and ears into
    water—but then she did not know how you, and I, and ours, live under
    a miraculous dispensation, and could only simply be astonished when
    they took to blowing again as if they never had wanted the dew of the
    garden, ... yes, and when at last they outlived all the prosperity of
    the contemporary white violets which flourished in water from the
    beginning, and were free from the disadvantage of having been sate
    upon. Now you shall thank me for this letter, it is at once so amusing
    and instructive. After all, too, it teaches you what the great events
    of my life are, not that the resuscitation of your violets would not
    really be a great event to me, even if I led the life of a pirate,
    between fire and sea, otherwise. But take you away ... out of my
    life!—and what remains? The only greenness I used to have (before you
    brought your flowers) was as the grass growing in deserted streets,
    ... which brings a proof, in every increase, of the extending
    desolation.


    Dearest, I persist in thinking that you ought not to be too disdainful
    to explain your meaning in the Pomegranates. Surely you might say in a
    word or two that, your title having been doubted about (to your
    surprise, you might say!), you refer the doubters to the Jewish
    priest's robe, and the Rabbinical gloss ... for I suppose it is a
    gloss on the robe ... do you not think so? Consider that Mr. Kenyon
    and I may fairly represent the average intelligence of your
    readers,—and that he was altogether in the clouds as to your
    meaning ... had not the most distant notion of it,—while I, taking
    hold of the priest's garment, missed the Rabbins and the distinctive
    significance, as completely as he did. Then for Vasari, it is not the
    handbook of the whole world, however it may be Mrs. Jameson's. Now why
    should you be too proud to teach such persons as only desire to be
    taught? I persist—I shall teaze you.


    This morning my brothers have been saying ... 'Ah you had Mr. Browning
    with you yesterday, I see by the flowers,' ... just as if they said 'I
    see queen Mab has been with you.' Then Stormie took the opportunity of
    swearing to me by all his gods that your name was mentioned lately in
    the House of Commons—is that true? or untrue? He forgot to tell me
    at the time, he says,—and you were named with others and in relation
    to copyright matters. Is it true?


    Mr. Hornblower Gill is the author of a Hymn to Passion week, and wrote
    to me as the 'glorifier of pain!' to remind me that the best glory of
    a soul is shown in the joy of it, and that all chief poets except
    Dante have seen, felt, and written it so. Thus and therefore was
    matured his purpose of writing an 'ode to joy,' as I told you. The man
    seems to have very good thoughts, ... but he writes like a colder
    Cowley still ... no impulse, no heat for fusing ... no inspiration, in
    fact. Though I have scarcely done more than glance at his 'Passion
    week,' and have little right to give an opinion.


    If you have killed Luria as you helped to kill my violets, what shall
    I say, do you fancy? Well—we shall see! Do not kill yourself,
    beloved, in any case! The ιοστεφανοι

Μουσαι had better die
    themselves first! Ah—what am I writing? What nonsense? I mean, in
    deep earnest, the deepest, that you should take care and exercise, and
    not be vexed for Luria's sake—Luria will have his triumph presently!
    May God bless you—prays your own

Ba.


