
Tuesday Afternoon.
[Post-mark, March 24, 1846.]


    My own dearest, if you do—(for I confess to nothing of the kind),
    but if you should detect an unwillingness to write at certain times,
    what would that prove,—I mean, what that one need shrink from
    avowing? If I never had you before me except when writing letters to
    you—then! Why, we do not even talk much now! witness Mr. Buckingham
    and his voyage that ought to have been discussed!—Oh, how coldly I
    should write,—how the bleak-looking paper would seem unpropitious to
    carry my feeling—if all had to begin and try to find words this
    way!


    Now, this morning I have been out—to town and back—and for all the
    walking my head aches—and I have the conviction that presently when I
    resign myself to think of you wholly, with only the pretext,—the
    make-believe of occupation, in the shape of some book to turn over the
    leaves of,—I shall see you and soon be well; so soon! You must know,
    there is a chair (one of the kind called gondóla-chairs by
    upholsterers—with an emphasized o)—which occupies the precise place,
    stands just in the same relation to this chair I sit on now, that
    yours stands in and occupies—to the left of the fire: and, how often,
    how always I turn in the dusk and see the dearest real Ba with me.


    How entirely kind to take that trouble, give those sittings for me! Do
    you think the kindness has missed its due effect? No, no, I am
    glad,—(knowing what I now know,—what you meant should be, and
    did all in your power to prevent) that I have not received the
    picture, if anything short of an adequate likeness. 'Nil nisi—te!'
    But I have set my heart on seeing it—will you remember next time,
    next Saturday?


    I will leave off now. To-morrow, dearest, only dearest Ba, I will
    write a longer letter—the clock stops it this afternoon—it is later
    than I thought, and our poor crazy post! This morning, hoping against
    hope, I ran to meet our postman coming meditatively up the lane—with
    a letter, indeed!—but Ba's will come to-night—and I will be happy,
    already am happy, expecting it. Bless you, my own love,

Ever your—


